SIR BERTRAND, A FRAGMENT (FROM MISCELLANEOUS PIECES IN PROSE)

Anna Laititia Barbauld

1773


. . . . . . After this adventure, Sir Bertrand turned his steed towards
the wolds, hoping to cross these dreary moors before the curfew.
But ere he had proceeded half his journey, he was bewildered by the
different tracks, and not being able, as far as the eye could reach, to
espy any object but the brown heath surrounding him, he was at length
quite uncertain which way he should direct his course. Night overtook
him in this situation. It was one of those nights when the moon gives a
faint glimmering of light through the thick black clouds of a lowering
sky. Now and then she suddenly emerged in full splendor from her veil;
and then instantly retired behind it, having just served to give the
forlorn Sir Bertrand a wide extended prospect over the desolate waste.
Hope and native courage a while urged him to push forwards, but at
length the increasing darkness and fatigue of body and mind overcame
him; he dreaded moving from the ground he stood on, for fear of unknown
pits and bogs, and alighting from his horse in despair, he threw
himself on the ground. He had not long continued in that posture when
the sullen toll of a distant bell struck his ears--he started up, and,
turning towards the sound, discerned a dim twinkling light. Instantly
he seized his horse’s bridle, and with cautious steps advanced towards
it. After a painful march, he was stopt by a moated ditch surrounding
the place from whence the light proceeded; and by a momentary glimpse
of moon-light he had a full view of a large antique mansion, with
turrets at the corners, and an ample porch in the center. The injuries
of time were strongly marked on every thing about it. The roof in
various places was fallen in, the battlements were half demolished,
and the windows broken and dismantled. A draw-bridge, with a ruinous
gate-way at each end, led to the court before the building. He entered,
and instantly the light, which proceeded from a window in one of the
turrets, glided along and vanished; at the same moment the moon sunk
beneath a black cloud, and the night was darker than ever. All was
silent. Sir Bertrand fastened his steed under a shed, and approaching
the house, traversed its whole front with light and slow footsteps.
All was still as death. He looked in at the lower windows, but could
not distinguish a single object through the impenetrable gloom. After
a short parley with himself, he entered the porch, and seizing a massy
iron knocker at the gate, lifted it up, and hesitating, at length
struck a loud stroke. The noise resounded through the whole mansion
with hollow echoes. All was still again. He repeated the strokes more
boldly, and louder--another interval of silence ensued. A third time
he knocked, and a third time all was still. He then fell back to some
distance, that he might discern whether any light could be seen in the
whole front. It again appeared in the same place, and quickly glided
away as before. At the same instant, a deep sullen toll sounded from
the turret. Sir Bertrand’s heart made a fearful stop--He was a while
motionless; then terror impelled him to make some hasty steps towards
his steed; but shame stopt his flight; and, urged by honour, and a
resistless desire of finishing the adventure, he returned to the
porch; and, working up his soul to a full steadiness of resolution,
he drew forth his sword with one hand, and with the other lifted up
the latch of the gate. The heavy door, creaking upon its hinges,
reluctantly yielded to his hand--he applied his shoulder to it, and
forced it open--he quitted it, and stept forward--the door instantly
shut with a thundering clap. Sir Bertrand’s blood was chilled--he
turned back to find the door, and it was long ere his trembling hands
could seize it--but his utmost strength could not open it again. After
several ineffectual attempts, he looked behind him, and beheld, across
a hall, upon a large staircase, a pale bluish flame, which cast a
dismal gleam of light around. He again summoned forth his courage, and
advanced towards it--It retired. He came to the foot of the stairs,
and, after a moment’s deliberation, ascended. He went slowly up, the
flame retiring before him, till he came to a wide gallery--The flame
proceeded along it, and he followed in silent horror, treading lightly,
for the echoes of his footsteps startled him. It led him to the foot
of another staircase, and then vanished. At the same instant, another
toll sounded from the turret--Sir Bertrand felt it strike upon his
heart. He was now in total darkness, and, with his arms extended, began
to ascend the second staircase. A dead cold hand met his left hand,
and firmly grasped it, drawing him forcibly forwards--he endeavoured
to disengage himself, but could not--he made a furious blow with his
sword, and instantly a loud shriek pierced his ears, and the dead hand
was left powerless in his--He dropt it, and rushed forwards with a
desperate valour. The stairs were narrow and winding, and interrupted
by frequent breaches, and loose fragments of stone. The staircase
grew narrower and narrower, and at length terminated in a low iron
grate. Sir Bertrand pushed it open--it led to an intricate winding
passage, just large enough to admit a person upon his hands and knees.
A faint glimmering of light served to shew the nature of the place.
Sir Bertrand entered--A deep hollow groan resounded from a distance
through the vault--He went forwards, and proceeding beyond the first
turning, he discerned the same blue flame which had before conducted
him. He followed it. The vault, at length, suddenly opened into a
lofty gallery, in the midst of which a figure appeared, completely
armed, thrusting forwards the bloody stump of an arm, with a terrible
frown and menacing gesture, and brandishing a sword in his hand. Sir
Bertrand undauntedly sprung forwards; and, aiming a fierce blow at
the figure, it instantly vanished, letting fall a massy iron key.
The flame now rested upon a pair of ample folding doors at the end
of the gallery. Sir Bertrand went up to it, and applied the key to a
brazen lock. With difficulty he turned the bolt. Instantly the doors
flew open, and discovered a large apartment, at the end of which was
a coffin rested upon a bier, with a taper burning on each side of it.
Along the room, on both sides, were gigantic statues of black marble,
attired in the Moorish habit, and holding enormous sabres in their
right hands. Each of them reared his arm, and advanced one leg forwards
as the knight entered; at the same moment, the lid of the coffin flew
open, and the bell tolled. The flame still glided forwards, and Sir
Bertrand resolutely followed, till he arrived within six paces of the
coffin. Suddenly, a lady in a shroud and black veil rose up in it,
and stretched out her arms towards him; at the same time, the statues
clashed their sabres, and advanced. Sir Bertrand flew to the lady, and
clasped her in his arms--she threw up her veil, and kissed his lips;
and instantly the whole building shook as with an earthquake, and fell
asunder with a horrible crash. Sir Bertrand was thrown into a sudden
trance, and, on recovering, found himself seated on a velvet sofa, in
the most magnificent room he had ever seen, lighted with innumerable
tapers, in lustres of pure crystal. A sumptuous banquet was set in the
middle. The doors opening to soft music, a lady of incomparable beauty,
attired with amazing splendor, entered, surrounded by a troop of gay
nymphs, more fair than the Graces. She advanced to the knight, and,
falling on her knees, thanked him as her deliverer. The nymphs placed
a garland of laurel upon his head, and the lady led him by the hand to
the banquet, and sat beside him. The nymphs placed themselves at the
table, and a numerous train of servants entering, served up the feast;
delicious music playing all the time. Sir Bertrand could not speak for
astonishment: he could only return their honours by courteous looks
and gestures. After the banquet was finished, all retired but the
lady, who, leading back the knight to the sofa, addressed him in these
words:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

