THE ABBESS: A ROMANCE

William Henry Ireland 

1799



V. 3 



THE ABBESS 



CHAP. I. 

Why, I can smile, and murder while I smile; 
And cry content to that which grieves my heart; 
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears; 
And frame my face to all occasions : 
I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall; 
I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk ; 
I'll play the orator as well as Nestor ; 
Deceive more slily than Ulysses could ; 
And; like a Sinon, take another Troy : 
I can add colours even to the cameleon ; 
Change shapes with Proteus, for advantages ; 
And set th' aspiring Catiline to school. 

Shakspeare. 

Don Giuseppe Cazini was the name 

of the signer whose conduct had so 

much astonished the conte Marcello. 

VOL. III. B He 



2 THE ABBESS. 

He was the natural son of the marchese 
Ferdinando Monte, who possessed a 
dark and designing soul, not unacquaint- 
ed with deeds of guilt. In his infancy, 
Ferdinando lost an indulgent mother; 
nor did his father long survive her. 
Thus he became sole inheritor of the 
family title and estate, having only his 
younger brother Felippo to provide for. 

To the generality of the world, the 
marchese appeared to be a man pos- 
sessing a good understanding, cultivated 
by a liberal education. He was well 
acquainted with human nature, which 
knowledge he turned to his own advan- 
tage ; nor did his friends suspect the in- 
nate passions of his bosom, he having 
sufficient art to conceal the depravity of 
his principles beneath the garb of seem- 
ing virtue. In his animosities he was 
implacable and ferocious; neither did he 
stop at any thing to satisfy his thirst for 
vengeance. 

For 



\ 



THE ABBESS. 3 

For the space of two years he resided 
at Florence, during which time he form- 
ed an acquaintance with most of the 
noble families of that city, amongst 
whom was the duca Bertocci : even the 
grand duca was partial to Ferdinando, 
and often admitted him into his confi- 
dence. 

The intimacy between the marchese 
and the duca Bertocci, subsisted for some 
months, when suddenly the duca dis- 
continued his visits, and, from that pe- 
riod, the marchese became sullen and 
morose. He quitted society, and soon 
after abjured all communication with 
the world. When alone, he yielded 
himself a prey to the gloomy horrors of 
his soul. Strange reports were whis- 
pered concerning his conduct, and vari- 
ous were the conjectures respecting his 
acquaintance and breach of amity with 
the duca Bertocci. 

B 2 Some 



4 THE ABBESS. 

Some months after this event, he dis- 
appeared from Florence, accompanied 
by his brother Felippo, and, for some 
years, resided in a remote part on the 
frontiers of Italy. His son Giuseppe 
Cazini being, at that period, about two 
years old, in this solitude, the marchese 
attentively watched the bent of his grow- 
ing inclinations, and, at fifteen, he found 
his mind stored with many virtues. He 
was humane and generous, possessing 
an intrepidity of spirit remarkable at his 
age : he had a penetrating understand- 
ing, and a peculiar sweetness of temper: 
he was, at this early period, sincere in his 
professions of regard, and the first prin- 
ciples of honour seemed dawning in his 
youthful breast. Yet, he possessed two 
failings, if such they might be called ; 
too little caution in concealing his dis- 
like, and yielding an over- implicit be- 
lief to the tales of others. He was not 
aware that this unguardedness might 

one 



THE ABBESS. S 

one day overwhelm him with guilt and 
horror. 

The marchese, strange as it may ap- 
pear, endeavoured to eradicate these ri- 
pening virtues, which he regretted to 
find planted in his bosom. Often would 
he delineate vice in the most pleasing 
and alluring colours ; but his subtle ar- 
guments, tliough glossed with a flow of 
most elegant language, could not uproot 
the stubborn virtues of his generous 
breast, or shake his principles of innate 
rectitude. Finding, at length, his de- 
testable precepts were ineffectual, and 
did not tend to lessen Cazini's love of 
virtue, he took a more sure method of 
bending him to his horrid purpose. He 
suddenly absented himself from the so- 
ciety of the few that visited him, none 
but Felippo, his brother, being admit- 
ted into his presence. Giuseppe re- 
marked this change in his father's con- 
duct ; and notwithstanding the detesta- 
B 3 tion 



6. THE ABBESS. 

tion in which he held his principles, 
would joyfully have offered up his life 
to contribute to his happiness. He made 
several attempts to gain admission into 
his chamber, but was always opposed by 
Felippo. 

Being thus banished his society, he 
had recourse to those authors which he 
had himself privately procured ; for the 
marchese was no friend to literature, 
and had never lavished useless sums (for 
so he deemed them) to purchase those 
productions, which might inform, ex- 
pand, and elevate the ever-searching 
soul. His wealth was appropriated to 
other purposes. No pursuit did he re- 
gard, except it tended to the gratifica- 
tion of his sensual appetites ; nor did 
the consciousness that he enjoyed them 
at the cost of another's happiness dimi- 
nish in the least his satisfaction. 

Signor Cazini was the reputed off- 
spring 



THE ABBESS. 7 

spring of an illicit connection. In this 
secluded situation, without the presence 
of a hunnan being to enliven the dull 
unchanging scene, Giuseppe would wan- 
der over the surrounding country, which 
presented sonne of nature's niost pronji- 
nent features. 

To the left, a bold chain of rocks ex- 
tended themselves as far as the eye could 
attain. Their shaggy sides were shaded 
with dark pine and beech, that formed a 
striking contrast to the milky clouds ob- 
scuring their summits. A wide lake 
skirted their base, reflecting on its sil- 
very surface the dark foliage, that, agi- 
tated by the breeze, waved over its cool 
bosom. 

To the right, the enchanted eye 
roved with delight over beauteous mea- 
dows, clothed with pleasing verdure, 
and interspersed with rich vineyards, 
teeming with clustering vines, weighed 
down by luscious grapes. 

B 4 On 



8 THE ABBESS. 

On a rising ground in front, stood the 
magnificent remains of an antique temple, 
formerly dedicated to Diana. Two rows 
of columns of the Ionic order, led to this 
once splendid edifice. The portico open- 
ed wide, and on either side, were pedes- 
tals, whereon stood mutilated statues in 
white marble. The arch was adorned 
with the richest workmanship, repre- 
senting subjects that related to the hea- 
then mythology. 

The inside of the temple was spacious ; 
the roof had been supported by fluted 
columns, of the Corinthian and Compo- 
site order, the bases of which were 
adorned with festoons or heads of Ro- 
man emperors. In the walls, at equal 
distances, were the remains of various 
statues of granite and porphyry, the pe- 
destals being adorned with fine carved 
work. The altar, which stood at the 
farther end of the temple, was supported 
by the hind, sacred to Diana. A few 

paces 



THE ABBESS. 9 

paces farther was a superb peristyle of 
fluted columns, their wrought capitals 
supporting a noble canopy, beneath 
which formerly rested the statue of the 
goddess. The roof of this magnificent 
fabric was broken down and scattered on 
the ruined pavement, each fragment 
affording signal proofs of the skill of the 
ancients; and the whole combined to 
impress the soul with a melancholy idea 
of transitory grandeur. 

Such were the scenes that on either 
side struck Giuseppe's attention. Some- 
times he contemplated these remains of 
earthly splendour; they proved at once 
the imbecility and strength of human 
capacity. 

" How neglected lie," would he ex- 
claim, " these superb relics, that were 
reared to be the admiration of futurity ! 
Let the great contemplate these ruined 
walls, and sicken at the reflection, that 
B 5 their 



10 THE ABBESS. 

their honours will scarce outlive them-- 
selves, but must all be levelled with the 
dust ! Let the peasant behold the scene, 
and rejoice. He will also die ; but no 
" longing, lingering" recollection of 
earthly pride will enchain him to this 
world. He will in peace yield up his 
breath ; and, though no pompous pro- 
cession may accompany him to his long 
home, no splendid mausoleum announce 
the spot which holds his mortal frame, 
his widow's tears will damp the roses 
she hath planted on his silent grave; 
his children's lips will kiss the verdant 
sod; and peasants, as they pass the 
well-known turf, will pause, to yield 
the unaffected sigh his virtuous memory 
claims." 

How oft would Giuseppe glorify the 
Omnipotent, when, on the margin of 
the still lake, he gazed upon the scene 
before him! Now, the bright rays of 
the meridian sun, darting full upon the 
]h:r lofty 



THE ABBESS. 11 

lofty pine and spreading beech, enli- 
vened the dark green colour of their fo- 
liage, and, reflecting on the translucent 
water, made it appear a broad stream of 
liquid fire. Sometimes, Giuseppe would 
watch the declining beam, as it laced 
with streaks of gold the venerable ruin. 
Fading, they assumed a saffron tinge, 
which gradually vanished in the twi- 
light. The grey mists, then, exhaling 
and lightly floating on its surface, veil 
the glassy lake. At length, the pallid 
orb of night, arising, cast her silver man- 
tle o'er the darksome scene. The breeze 
seems then more cool and more refresh- 
ing. 

'Twas at a time like this, when stilly 
silence reigned around, that Giuseppe 
would call to mind the lines of Petrarch 
to his beloved Laura, or the beauties of 
Sorrento's sweet bard, the divine Tasso. 
How would his breast swell with the 
love of arms, or melt with tender fire, 
B 6 as 



12 THE ABBESS. 

as he repeated the poet's glowing and 
harmonious page! 'Twas then a sigh 
would escape his bosom ; 'twas then the 
tear of regret bedewed his cheek ; for 
his soul was inactive, and no Laura had 
yet touched his heart. 

Thus he passed his days; a pensive 
melancholy at length stole over him. 
One evening, after having indulged his 
wonted sadness, he was returning home- 
ward, when he was suddenly interrupt- 
ed in his meditations, by the appear- 
ance of his uncle Felippo, who thus 
addressed him : — " You seem thought- 
ful, Cazini. I have of late observed 
your motions; why are you thus de- 
jected ?" 

" 1 am unhappy," answered Giu- 
seppe ; " my soul despises this state of 
base inaction. Wherefore does my fa- 
ther debar me his presence ? Have I 
e'er offended him by word or deed, that 
he should thus discountenance his son ? 

If 



THE ABBESS. 13 

If it were so, I would for ever hide me 
from his sight, since I must give him 
pain. I possess no claim to his bounty, 
'tis true : I am his son — the offspring of 
an unhappy mother — but where is that 
parent? If the marchese despises, she 
will not, surely, forget her child." 

" Yes," returned Felippo, " she did 
forget thee. She abandoned thy father, 
and quitted, without a sigh, the babe 
she had just given to the world." 

" Impossible !" cried Giuseppe ; " the 
smallest reptile will protect its young ; 
and I have heard that the yearnings of 
a mother's breast will lead her to love 
her offspring, though loaded with the 
most atrocious guilt." 

" Yes, Giuseppe, not one tear or 
sigh escaped her adamantine bosom. 
When absent, she cursed thee, nor 
would thy death have satiated her un- 
natural hatred." 

" Yet, tell me, Felippo, where may 
I find her ? Even now she, perhaps, re- 
pents, 



14 THE ABBESS. 

pents, and I may soothe her mental an- 
guish. I may kiss away the tears that 
bathe her palHd countenance, or lay my 
head upon her throbbing bosom, that 
we may mingle mutual tears of joy and 
pity." 

" You will never behold her, Giu- 
seppe ; she is an inhabitant of the cold 
tomb." 

" Did she not regret her pitiless con- 
duct towards me ?" 

" Her death thy father soon became 
acquainted with; but her sentiments 
respecting thee remain a secret." 

Tears bedewed Giuseppe's cheeks : 
he felt a sickness at his heart; he would 
have spoken, but his sighs stifled all 
utterance. 

" Do not wrong the marchese," con- 
tinued Felippo; " he loves thee, Giu- 
seppe, for thy mother's sake.'* 

" And 



THE ABBESS. 15 

" And did he then love my mother?" 
returned Cazini, in broken accents. 

" He idolized her: he would have 
made her his for ever, had she not basely 
fled from him. Oh ! had you a soul, Giu- 
seppe, you would not patiently behold 
your father's anguish ; you would stir in 
his cause." 

" Gracious Heaven !" exclaimed Ca- 
zini, " what can I do that will tend to 
the restoration of his peace ?" 

" You, and you only, can alleviate his 
melancholy." 

** Oh, let me see him ! Conduct me 
to his presence, which I have so long 
desired, that on my knees I may offer 
up my life in token of my duty." 

" I will accompany you to his cham- 
ber," returned Felippo, fixing his eyes 
on Giuseppe, which seemed animated 
with a look expressive of horror and 
triumph. " I came purposely to tell 
you that he desired your presence." 

They proceeded with a quick step to- 
wards 



16 THE ABBESS. 

wards the mansion, and Giuseppe flew 
to his father's apartment. He entered, 
but the marchese was so absorbed in 
thought that he observed not his ap- 
proach. He was sitting at a table, 
whereon were scattered several papers; 
his riglit hand concealed within his vest, 
while the left covered his visage; Giu- 
seppe approached him, and dropping on 
one knee, exclaimed — " Dearest father, 
I obey your summons." 

At that instant the marchese started 
from his seat. He drew his hand from 
his bosom, which grasped a naked dag- 
ger, and exclaimed furiously — " Why 
does vengeance sleep. Will he not feel 
his father's injuries ?" 

" He does feel and will redress them," 
returned Quseppe. 

The marchese turned his head ; he 
seemed surprised that any one was near 
him ; he quickly secreted the weapon 

in 



THE ABBESS. 17 

in his vest, and approaching his son, 
pressed him to his heart. 

" How has my bosom panted," cried 
Giuseppe, " for this renewal of my fa- 
ther's love ! how have I desired to soften 
his melancholy, and offer up my life that 
I might procure his peace of mind !" 

" Thou art then my child, and worthy 
of my affection," returned the marchese, 
a malicious satisfaction appearing in his 
countenance ; " yes, with thee it lies to 
restore my lost happiness : thou mayst 
obtain my everlasting love." Again he 
embraced his son. 

" Oh, tell me," cried Giuseppe, " what 
" service can I render my beloved father, 
that will for ever entitle me to his pa- 
ternal care ?" 

" Hear me, Giuseppe," cried the mar- 
chese, " and then be yourself the judge." 

He desired his son to be seated. 
Then approaching the portal, secured 

it. 



18 THE ABBESS. 

it, that they might be free from inter- 
ruption. 

" My youthful days were spent at Na- 
ples. At nineteen I commenced my 
travels, and was eight years absent from 
that city. Having remained there some 
time, I determined to remove to Flo- 
rence, and there take up my residence. 
I was well received at the court of the 
grand duke of Tuscany. I formed con- 
nections with the most distinguished 
families of Florence, and, during two 
months, 1 experienced an uninterrupted 
state of happiness. 

/* I was one day introduced to a no- 
bleman's daughter, who was just eman- 
cipated from a convent, where she had 
been educated from her infancy. She 
had attained her eighteenth year, was 
beautiful, innocent, and every way cal- 
culated, I thought, to insure me an un- 
interrupted state of felicity. I soon felt 
the strongest attachment for her: I took 

every 



THE ABBESS. 19 

every opportunity of confessing my 
passion, and found, to my inexpressible 
joy, that she was not displeased at my 
addresses. 

" About a month after our first meet- 
ing, being one day engaged at her fa- 
ther's house, I met, amongst many 
other persons, the duca Bertocci, to 
whom I was then introduced : he ap- 
peared about my own age, and by his 
pleasing conversation, and the marked 
attention which he seemed to bestow 
on me, I was strongly prepossessed in 
his favour. From that time our friend- 
ship commenced, and we were seldom 
absent from each other's society. I ac- 
quainted him with the state of my 
heart; I confided every thing to his 
breast : he praised the woman on whom 
I had placed my affections, and, if pos- 
sible, stimulated my passion. 

" Shortly after the commencement of 
this friendship, being, one day, heated 
with the wine I had freely drank at the 

duca's 



20 THE ABBESS. 

duca's table, 1 hastened to the mansion 
which contained the object of my affec- 
tions. She was alone ; our conversation 
soon became interesting, when she con- 
fessed her passion for me. In the heat 
of my transport I seized her in my 
arms, and, unmindful of what I did, 
yielded to the impulse of the moment, 
and accomplished her ruin." 

" Her ruin !" reiterated Cazini, has- 
tily rising. 

" Yes, my son," returned the mar- 
chese; " thou art the offspring of that 
detested act." 

Giuseppe's cheeks were covered with 
a blush ; he bent his eyes to the ground, 
and was silent. 

" My delirium soon vanished," con- 
tinued the marchese ; " I vented curses 
on my own head. Upon my knees, I 
entreated her forgiveness, whom I had 
so much wronged. I told her that she 

was 



THE ABBESS. 21 

was mine, and that I would instantly 
demand her of her father : her love for 
me overcame everv other consideration. 
I could not that night bear to remain in 
her presence, and I soon left her, under 
the promise of returning the following 
day. 

" As I was preparing the next morn- 
ing to fulfil my engagement, the duca 
Bertocci made his appearance. He ob- 
served the perturbation of my spirits, 
and having questioned me concerning 
the cause, I told him I was then going 
to request the hand of her, without 
whom I could no longer support exist- 
ence. He offered his services, and, by 
his insidious arguments, I was prevailed 
upon to suffer him to make my wishes 
known to her father. He shortly af- 
ter returned, telling me I had every 
thing to hope ; but that I must, for a 
few days, discontinue my visits, as her 
father wished to consult his daughter on 
a matter of such importance. Overjoy- 
ed 



22 THE ABBESS. 

ed at hearing this welcome intelligence, 
I unguardedly accepted an invitation 
from the duca, to accompany him for a 
few days to a villa, some leagues from 
Florence. Several young noblemen were 
of the party; we were happy, and I 
more particularly so than the rest. 

" On the evening of the second day, 
the duca Bertocci pretended to receive 
letters of importance, which compelled 
him to set off for Florence. He insist- 
ed on our remaining at the villa till his 
return ; we consented, and he was ab- 
sent from us several days. 

" In the course of a week he return- 
ed, and I repaired with him to Florence ; 
but conceive my astonishment at find- 
ing my proposals were rejected, and I 
was desired never more to re-enter the 
mansion which contained the idol of my 
soul. The villanous duca assumed a 
well-feigned appearance of wonder, and 
having again made a thousand profes- 
sions of friendship, offered to use his en- 
deavours 



THE ABBESS. 23 

deavours with her father to procure my 
happiness. 

" Six tedious months elapsed, and I 
was tortured with unceasing anxiety. 
Sometimes he inspired me with hopes ; 
at others, he told me that he feared no- 
thing would make her father swerve 
from his resolution. The fatal moment 
at length arrived, when the veil was to 
be torn from my deluded eyes. 

" Four tedious days elapsed, without 
my either seeing or hearing from the 
duca. My servants were told, when 
they inquired at his palace, that he had 
suddenly quitted Florence on business 
of import. On the evening of the fifth 
day, a female came to my hotel; she 
was ushered into my apartment ; in her 
arms she held a new-born infant ; I felt 
a sudden emotion at her approach. She 
was unable to articulate a syllable, but 
gave the child into my arms: — thou, 
Giuseppe, wast that luckless babe. From 
her I learnt, at length, the dreadful 

truth 



24 THE ABBESS. 

truth — That the detested duca Bertocci 
had betrayed the trust I had reposed in 
him, and had made an offer of his hand 
and fortune to the father of her I loved 
— they were accepted. Through his 
machinations I was forbid the mansion 
which contained her. Soon after she 
made known her situation ; this did not 
deter the base villain from putting his 
plan into execution. My character was 
defamed — my conduct towards her was 
placed in the most detested light, and, 
to complete the scene of deception, she 
was informed that, like a villain, I had 
abandoned her. Her mind was imposed 
upon by these artful falsehoods ; her 
love towards me was converted into ha- 
tred ; she would not even look upon 
thee, Giuseppe, but pronounced her ma- 
lediction on thy head, after which thou 
wast conveyed to me. The dreadful 
agitation of my mind produced a raging 
fever, and I was for many days in a de- 
lirious state. 

" When 



THE ABBESS. 25 

** When I regained my recollection, I 
was then informed that her father, du- 
ring my illness, had suddenly expired; 
and that the detested duca, taking ad- 
vantage of thy mother's unprotected 
situation, had conveyed her from Flo- 
rence as his mistress, having, like a 
villain, forgot to put his promise of 
marriage into execution. I demanded 
honourable satisfaction, but the duca 
quitted Florence, and evaded my re- 
search. 

" Wearied with disappointments, and 
soured by the treachery of the world, I 
retired to this solitude, where I have 
reared you, my son, to be the avenger 
of your father's wrongs." 

" Yes, yes; these are injuries," has- 
tily returned Giuseppe, " that far ex- 
ceed the usual sufferings allotted to 
mankind. Oh, my father, you have 
felt the power of love. Your heart has 
been open to the voice of friendship, a 
villain usurped the sacred title, and, un- 

VOL. III. c der 



26 THE ABBESS. 

der that specious garb, betrayed and 
ruined your peace for ever." 

" And does not such a friend merit 
death?" returned the marchese, in an 
elevated tone. 

" Heaven will doubtless judge him," 
answered Giuseppe ; " his demerits will 
not go unpunished." 

" And will that thought afford me 
consolation? I still have been wronged. 
My mind will for ever bear the canker 
of affliction ; nor will the hope of retri- 
butive punishment withdraw from thee 
thy mother's malediction. Arouse thy- 
self, my son — let vengeance animate thy 
bosom. The wretch yet lives, who is 
the author of thy father's sufferings — 
whose machinations drew thy mother's 
curse upon thy head ! with thee it re- 
mains to strike the blow, for thou hast 
been doubly injured." 

" Yes, I have lost a tender mother's 
love; and her imprecations still hang 

over 



THE ABBESS. 27 

over me. I will seek vengeance ; yes, 
I swear " 

Giuseppe rose from his seat, and 
pronounced the last words with vehe- 
mence. 

" Hold !" cried the marchese, who 
instantly presented him a missal. " Swear 
on this that you will revenge your 
own and your father's injuries." 

" 1 do most solemnly!" answered 
Giuseppe, and returned the book into 
the marchese's hand, who instantly 
clasped him to his bosom, while a look 
of ferocious triumph sat on his gloomy 
countenance. — " There spoke my son," 
did he exultingly exclaim, drawing the 
dagger from his vest. " Take this wea- 
pon, Giuseppe, and use it to extirpate 
that base wretch, whose arts deprived 
me of happiness — whose villainy robbed 
thee of a parent. Take this steel, and, 
at a fit season, let it pierce the traitor's 
c 2 bosom— 



28 THE ABBESS. 

bosom — let it drink his corrupt blood ; 
I shall then smile with satisfaction — 
my vengeance will be satiated. Your 
breast, too, will applaud the equity of 
the deed." 

There was something terrific in the 
marchese's aspect, which, added to the 
dreadful words he had pronounced, 
struck horror to the soul of Giuseppe, 
and he remained for some time motion- 
less. He was suddenly roused, at hear- 
ing his father pronounce these words — 
" Take the weapon, or, like a coward, 
break your oath, and henceforth merit 
my hatred and contempt." 

Giuseppe gradually raised his tremb- 
ling arm : he grasped the handle of the 
dagger. At that moment the warm 
blood curdled round his heart. A 
stream of liquid fire now ran through 
every vein ; his sight thickened, and for 
a moment all pulsation ceased. He 

sunk 



THE ABBESS. 29 

sunk upon a chair, and remained for 
some minutes in a state of stupefaction. 

On his recovery, he beheld the mar- 
chese pacing the chamber in violent agi- 
tation, often striking his breast and 
forehead. Giuseppe's heart melted; he 
ilew to his father, and throwing himself 
at his feet, clung round his knees, ex- 
claiming — " Take me once more to 
your bosom ; your unhappy Giuseppe 
will revenge your wrongs, and bury the 
weapon in the villain's heart." 

The marchese raised him, and after 
observing him for some time in silence, 
cried — " Yes, I will confide in your 
courage ; you shall still be my son." 

Giuseppe soon quitted his father's 
presence. When in his chamber, he 
endeavoured to banish the unpleasant 
thoughts that agitated his mind. He 
tried to reconcile the murder he had 
sworn to perpetrate with the strict rules 
c 3 of 



30 THE ABBESS. 

of justice. " Has not the duca been 
guilty of every crime that can degrade 
the human soul ? Has he not murder- 
ed my father's peace of mind ? And 
what were death to the loss of happi- 
ness? Has he not broken the sacred 
bond of friendship, and brought a mo- 
ther's malediction on her infant child ? 
Justice cries aloud for such a villain's 
death. But will the law avenge his 
crimes ? No ; and must justice then 
sleep ? She shall rouse to action at 
my call. This arm shall vindicate her 
cause." 

Such were the fallacious arguments 
that fired the youthful breast of Giu- 
seppe, and urged him to the perpetra- 
tion of the most detested deed of guilt. 
At length, he threw himself upon his 
couch, but his slumbers were disturbed 
by the most frightful visions. Unable 
to sustain the agonies of his mind, he 

rose. 



THE ABBESS. 31 

rose. It was past midnight. He felt a 
trepidation unknown to him before. 

" Gracious Heaven !" he exclaimed, 
" and does the mere tliought of murder 
liaunt the fancy sleeping, and thus ap- 
pal the mind ? What will then be my 
sensations, when I have realized the oath 
made to my father?" 

Giuseppe approached the window, 
and gazed unmoved on the sublime 
scenery before him. The chaste moon 
beamed with uncommon splendour, the 
tufted woods partly shading the broad 
lake beneath, which beautifully contrast- 
ing, added to the brightness of that part 
which reflected her lustre, giving it the 
most enchanting appearance ; the coun- 
try on the opposite side was enlightened 
by her silver rays; and the venerable 
ruin contributed to heighten the gran- 
deur of the scene. 

c 4 As 



32 THE ABBESS. 

As Giuseppe fixed his vacant gaze 
on these objects, which had so often af- 
forded satisfaction to his mind, he be- 
held a figure slowly pass beneath his 
window, and on a minute inspection, 
traced beneath the cloak that enve- 
loped the person, the marchese his fa- 
ther. His arms were folded, his head 
bent to the ground, and he seemed oc- 
cupied in deep meditation. Now he 
stopped, and placing his hand on his 
cheek, would for a minute appear lost 
in thought. Then, suddenly extending 
his hand, as if a new idea had struck 
him, he again proceeded in the same 
deliberate pace, when he was soon join- 
ed by Felippo. Their conversation 
seemed interesting, they talked aloud, 
and several incoherent expressions which 
reached Giuseppe's ear, convinced him 
that he was the object of their discourse. 

A considerable time elapsed, ere they 
entered the mansion. Giuseppe again 

endeavoured 



THE ABBESS. 33 

endeavoured to sleep, but his restless 
mind banished the soft spell from his 
pillow, and ere the clarion bird of morn 
had sent forth his shrill note, or the 
soaring lark had warbled his sweet me- 
lody, he had descended from his cham- 
ber, to taste the early dew of morning. 

On his return, he was admitted to 
the marchese's apartment, in whose con- 
duct he perceived the most visible al- 
teration. Felippo had also dissipated 
the gloom that usually clouded his dark 
countenance, and they conversed, du- 
ring the repast, on various topics. Giu- 
seppe also learned that it was his father's 
intention to visit Naples, and that the 
following morning was appointed for 
the commencement of their journey. 
The day was vSpent in preparing for their 
departure. 

In the evening he took his usual 

walk to the ruined temple ; he gazed 

c 5 on 



34s THE ABBESS. 

on every object, that from his early- 
years had been the subject of his con- 
templations. He felt a sadness at his 
heart ; he began to repeat some favour- 
ite stanzas, but could not proceed, for 
they were calculated to augment his 
melancholy. He reclined on that stone 
which had so often supported him; a 
heavy sigh escaped his breast, which 
was answered by the evening breeze, 
that murmuring through the mutilated 
walls, seemed to sympathize in his sor- 
row. He bent his eyes upon the pave- 
ment — they became dim with tears. 
He rose, at length, and quitted the ruins ; 
he could not refrain, but turned his head. 
Unconsciously, he again bent his course 
towards the temple. He traversed the 
well-remembered labyrinths, and then 
proceeded with lingering step, and 
many a retrospective view, towards the 
margin of the lake. Now, he beheld 
the last tinge of the declining sun, 
which had so often inspired him with 

a love 



THE ABBESS. 35 

a love of all- wonderful nature; it fell 
upon the beloved spot he had just quit- 
ted. His emotions became too power- 
ful; he turned his eyes tov\^ards the 
crystal surface, his tears mingled with 
its pure waters and ruffled its smooth 
bosom. He felt a cold tremour circu- 
late through his veins, and now the thin 
vapours skimmed over the silent lake. 
He turned his steps towards the villa, 
and as he fixed his regard upon the 
lofty forest that crowned the rugged 
steeps, waving their dark green foliage 
over the cool expanse of water, the 
plaintive wind that fanned their rustling 
leaves, seemed sighing to partake his 
sorrows. 

The following morning, at an early 
hour, Giuseppe quitted the abode of his 
infantile years. As the carriage drove 
off, he could not repress his sensations. 
The marchese rallied him, for yielding 
to such feminine ideas; and Felippo, 
c 6 who 



36 THE ABBESS. 

who was unacquainted with every nice 
feeling of the heart, and whose charac- 
ter was similiar to that of his brother, 
deemed his conduct pusillanimous and 
unbecoming the manly soul. Thus 
Giuseppe was compelled to restrain the 
noble workings of his breast, and as- 
sume an appearance of calmness that 
was in every respect foreign to his 
heart. He cast a look upon the reced- 
ing landscape. Now he caught a glunpse 
of the ruins, as the carriage wound 
round the base of a tremendous rock, and 
for the last time he beheld the lake and 
the dark tufted wood. 

" Ah," thought Giuseppe, " why did 
1 wish to quit that peaceful spot? I 
knew not the pangs I should feel at 
leaving it for ever. Will the gay scenes 
of life afford such pleasures ? Will the 
triumph of war, divine Tasso ! or will 
the charm of thy Laura, oh Petrarch ! 
prince of poets, compensate my lost 

happiness ? 



THE ABBESS. 37 

happiness? No; they vanish before 
the more powerful charm of tranquil 
solitude. Can the victor's laurel — the 
brilliant chariot wherein he sits enthro- 
ned, with pining captives following, at- 
tended by the shouts of countless mul- 
titudes, or the trophied arch, afford 
such real satisfaction to the mind as 
bounteous nature's variegated page? 
Can beauty's melting eye enchant my 
soul, compared with the glorious lumi- 
nary just bursting from the east? Im- 
possible ! The one may ravish my mor- 
tal sense, the other elevates and enchants 
my soul. Solitude is a blessed state, 
where truth's radiant beam, dispersing 
the clouds of worldly prejudice, full 
blazes. In peaceful solitude, the soul 
expands, and kindles into rapture. 
When the tumultuous din of society no 
more distracts us, then, unshackled 
from those little nothings, that for the 
most part occupy the short term of our 
existence, we feel the glorious move- 
ment. 



38 THE ABBESS. 

ment. Your immortal part — yes,- the 
divine soul, like an unclouded sun, then 
breaks forth, disdaining the corporeal 
substance that enfolds it, and we sail in 
the ethereal regions — we gain the azure 
heaven — we contemplate the all -won- 
drous system — we behold myriads of 
worlds, the velocity of motion, the bulk 
of matter, and the infinity of space. 
We see the various luminaries reflecting 
light refulgent ; still we soar, but sud- 
denly our course is checked, when we 
would behold the Mighty Architect, 
whose incomprehensible omnipotence 
doth sway the whole. We cannot 
pierce the ever-glorious light that veils 
his awful majesty; for, as the liquid 
fire, flowing from ^Etna's gulf, in heat 
and lustre is inferior to the noontide 
sun, so is this dazzling orb to that light 
inexpressible, surrounding the Supreme 
Divinity. These are the thoughts at- 
tendant on solitude — this is the philo- 
sophy of the recluse, and the real liber- 
ty 



THE ABBESS. 39 

ty that every mortal may enjoy. Oh 
that mankind would embrace the won- 
drous system, and not grasp at ideal 
happiness ! Genuine virtue would then 
inherit each bosom ; every chimerical 
doctrine would be expelled society ; the 
world would then become one glorious 
scene of virtuous emulation ; for every 
vicious principle being banished from 
the breast, we should only live to wor- 
ship the Creator, and to love his works." 

Such were the thoughts that occupied 
Giuseppe's bosom — such was his venera- 
tion for solitude — such his ideas of Di- 
vine Omnipotence. 

They continued for some days to tra- 
vel through a most fertile country. Du- 
ring their journey, the marchese would 
at times converse with his son ; but Fe- 
lippo was continually wrapped in gloo- 
my meditation. 

They 



40 THE ABBESS. 

They arrived at Rome, and Giuseppe 
beheld, with wonder and astonishment, 
that former queen of empires. From 
thence they proceeded, and at length ar- 
rived at Naples, sirnamed the noble, 
where Giuseppe was introduced, for the 
first time, to the busy haunts of men. 
A secret pleasure fluttered around his 
heart, but it was transitory. His ima- 
gination wandered to those silent retreats 
he had quitted, and, sighing, he mental- 
ly exclaimed — " Are these sumptuous 
habitations free from deceit? — will the 
gaudy chambers and gay voluptuous 
throngs that inhabit them, cherish that 
love of virtue which my solitude has in- 
spired ?" 

The hotel of the marchese Monti, 
where the carriage stopped, was a most 
noble building, and its interior was fitted 
up with taste and elegance. In a few 
days the mansion was crowded with vi- 
sitors, that came to congratulate him on 

his 



THE ABBESS. 41 

his return to Naples. He gave splendid 
entertainments, and launched into all 
the dissipation of the city. He seemed 
to have forgotten his former melancholy: 
yet although Giuseppe was overwhelm- 
ed with caresses, and introduced into all 
societies, he was pained by observing, at 
times, a gloomy malignancy on his fa- 
ther's countenance, and too often per- 
ceived that his kindness towards him 
was not in perfect unison with the ge- 
nuine dictates of his heart. 

The elegant person, engaging deport- 
ment, and strength of understanding, 
displayed by Giuseppe, soon rendered 
him the universal admiration. With 
the sage he would philosophize — the 
mildness of his manners endeared him 
to men of taste — and he was esteemed by 
the females the most handsome and ac- 
complished of his sex. 

About a month after their arrival at 

Naples, 



42 THE ABBESS. 

Naples, Giuseppe first beheld donna An- 
ton ia, daughter of monsignor Carlo Va- 
lenti. She was beautiful, and possessed 
the most refined understanding. Sig- 
nor Cazini soon became sensible of the 
power of her attractions ; he was assidu- 
ous in his behaviour towards her ; no 
society had charms where Antonia was 
not present, and his soul became in- 
spired with that passion, which in soli- 
tude he had deemed but an earthly sen- 
timent. 

Antonia soon learned the state of his 
heart, by the feelings that agitated her 
own, and they soon confessed a mutual 
love. This attachment did not long 
remain a secret. The signor Ippolito, 
Antonia's brother, remarked this altera- 
tion in his sister. She was frequently 
absorbed in reflection ; frequent sighs 
would escape her lips, and she lost all 
relish for society. He in vain endea- 
voured to draw from her the cause of 

her 



THE ABBESS. 43 

her dejection— she resisted all his en- 
treaties. Antonia's embarrassment in 
Giuseppe's presence, at length, betrayed 
to Ippolito the real state of her heart ; 
he took the earliest opportunity of ques- 
tioning her on the state of her breast. 
She was too ingenuous to conceal the 
truth, and he learned, with regret, the 
progress of her passion. 

Ippolito was a youth whom nature 
had endowed with many virtues; nor 
did he disown the noble qualifications of 
signor Cazini; but pride was the pre- 
dominant passion of his soul : he there- 
fore admired Giuseppe as a man, but 
could not, for a moment, look upon 
him in the light of a brother. The 
idea of an illegitimate becoming so 
nearly connected with his family, filled 
him with the most dreadful apprehen- 
sions, and he immediately made his fa- 
ther acquainted with the situation of 
Antonia's heart. All the pride of an 

Italian 



44 THE ABBESS. 

Italian kindled in his bosom, and his 
daughter was in consequence removed 
from Naples. 

Signor Ippolito did not disguise his 
sentiments ; for in a private interview 
with Giuseppe, he informed him that 
from his sister he had been informed of 
his passion. He censured her unjustifi- 
able conduct, in suffering him to con- 
tinue so long his fruitless addresses. 
He allowed Cazini all the merit due to 
his abilities ; and concluded by assuring 
him, that, under any other circumstance 
but the present, he should be proud to 
hail him as a brother. 

Giuseppe felt mortified on his own 
account, but pitied more the fallacious 
principles of Ippolito. He thought it 
beneath him to make any answer, and 
a coolness subsisted on either side. 

Some time after this interview, An- 

tonia 



THE ABBESS. 45 

tonia found means to convey a letter to 
Giuseppe. It contained the most ten- 
der assurances, and concluded with a 
solemn vow, that she would not be 
compelled to bestow her heart, but on 
the deserving object that already occu- 
pied it. Giuseppe, according to Anto- 
nia's desire, intrusted a written answer 
to the care of the person who had con- 
veyed her letter, in which he assured 
her, in the most passionate terms, that 
bis heart was dedicated to her, and that 
death alone should make him relinquish 
the claim he had upon her affections. 
He likewise acquainted her with the 
meeting that had taken place between 
himself and Ippolito, and concluded by 
describing, in lively colours, the agonies 
his mind had sustained, since her de- 
parture from Naples. 

The letter was dispatched by the 
messenger, who was one of the domes- 
tics of Antonia's father ; nor did Giu- 
seppe 



46 THE ABBESS. 

seppe forget to reward his kind services ; 
but, unfortunately, soon after he had 
quitted the gate of the hotel, he was 
met on the Strada by signor Ippolito, 
who instantly made inquiries concern- 
ing his sister, naturally supposing that 
she had dispatched him with some mes- 
sage to her father. The servant appear- 
ed confused, when Ippolito, in an au- 
thoritative tone, desired to know the 
purport of his visit to Naples. The 
poor fellow, not daring to disobey, im- 
mediately related his commission, and 
gave up Giuseppe's letter. Enraged at 
this discovery, he instantly repaired to 
the hotel of the march ese Monti — he 
found Cazini alone. Having produced 
his billet, he requested to see that of his 
sister, which had authorized his answer ; 
but Giuseppe refused to gratify his cu- 
riosity. Ippolito's rage increased to 
madness ; and after some warm conver- 
sation, he insisted that Cazini should re- 
linquish 



THE ABBESS. 47 

linquish all idea of his sister. To this 
Giuseppe gave a positive refusal. 

Ippolito then desired to know what 
would be his determination, if he should 
receive under Antonia's hand a direct re- 
fusal of his love, and her desire to be 
never more molested by his presence, or 
troubled with his epistles. 

" I should conclude," returned Giu- 
seppe, " that your sister acted not ac- 
cording to the genuine feelings of her 
heart, but that her actions were con* 
trolled by a rigid parent's decrees, and 
the glowing emotions of her soul were 
sacrificed to the hot pride of an offended 
brother." 

Ippolito frowned and bit his lips. 

" In such a case," continued Giu- 
seppe, " I should perhaps strive to for- 
get Antonia, not on her father's or her 

brother's 



48 THE ABBE8S. 

brother's account, but to prevent those 
tyrannical measures which they might 
pursue, to force her to compliance with 
their will." 

" Signor," returned the enraged Ip- 
polito, '- you shall soon hear from my 
sister, and then from me'' He laid a 
peculiar emphasis on the concluding 
word, and quitted the chamber with 
precipitation, leaving Giuseppe a prey 
to the most dreadful apprehensions on 
his beloved Antonia's account. 

The hotel of the marchese Monti was 
each day crowded with visitors; every 
luxury was procured, though at the 
most extravagant price ; and nothing was 
seen but one continued round of mirth 
and festivity. The marchese, too, in- 
dulged his propensity for gaming to an 
excess. Giuseppe gazed on this scene 
in mute astonishment. He dreaded the 
effects of these luxurious banquets; he 
feared lest the marchese's love of play 

should 



THE ABBESS. 4^ 

should prove detrimental to his health 
and fortune; for his passions being vio- 
lent in the extreme, he either could not 
conceal his excess of joy at experiencing 
the smiles of the fickle goddess, which 
laid him open to the machinations of 
the designing, or giving way to the 
most violent passion, when she favoured 
not his wishes. 

The total alteration in his father's 
conduct did not a little increase his sur- 
prise. During eighteen years, he had 
lived retired, a gloomy misanthrope; 
now, he courted society, and even the 
deceitful smile of the sycophant seemed 
to afford him pleasure. Often would he 
recur to his dreadful oath, and shudder 
at the recollection ; yet he was amazed 
at his father's silence on that head. Thus 
was Giuseppe's mind agitated by turns 
with love for Antonia, apprehensions 
for a parent, and horror at the thought 

VOL. III. D of 



50 THE ABBESS. 

of a crime he conceived himself bound 
to perpetrate. 

A fortnight elapsed since his inter- 
view with Ippolito — during which time 
he received no letter from him or his 
adored sister. He attributed this si- 
lence to the resolute mind of Antonia, 
who, he supposed, would not be induced, 
by force or entreaty, to annul the solemn 
vow which she had made him, of eternal 
fidelity. Giuseppe still continued in 
this state of incertitude, during several 
days, when he was one evening sum- 
moned to the marchese's closet, where 
he found him in close conversation with 
his brother. A dreadful gloom clouded 
his countenance; his brows were con- 
tracted, and his appearance was ghastly. 
The features of Felippo likewise be- 
trayed the strong agitation of his soul, 
and his dark eyes rolled, emitting a 
frenzied fire. The marchese instantly 
addressed his son in these words: — 

" Have 



THE ABBESS. 51 

" Have you, Giuseppe, forgot your 
oatl^?" 

" No," returned Cazini; " I remem- 
ber it full well." 

" Be then firm in your resolve, for 
you must shortly put it to the test. 
Now, go to your chamber, and prepare 
for your immediate departure from Na- 
ples." 

" What, my father! and must I quit 
you at so short a notice !" 

" At twelve, this night, repair to my 
closet." 

Giuseppe would have spoken, but the 
njarchese darting an angry look, mo- 
tioned him to leave the apartment. He 
was too well acquainted with his father's 
disposition to hesitate, and therefore 
immediately quitted his presence. 

While occupied in preparing for this 
precipitate journey, Giuseppe experien- 
ced the most dreadful sensations. — " I 
D 2 shall 



UBRARY 



52 THE ABBESS. 

shall never more behold the object of 
ray adoration," did he exclaim : " her 
brother will regard me in the light of 
a coward, and deem my journey the ef- 
fect of fear at his resentment. And 
what is my errand ? I go to perpetrate 
a crime, which must preclude all idea 
of Antonia ; for, can a murderer, though 
he should escape detection, ever after 
stand before the presence of virtue? — 
can a wretch, amenable to the laws of 
his country, and whose life justice will 
deem a forfeit — can such a monster, 
with his contaminating touch, pollute 
the fair form of an angel ? Forbid it, 
Heaven ! No, rather let me be consumed 
by this fire that preys upon my heart, 
or let the punishment attendant on my 
guilt, exterminate at once my loathed 
existence. But what may the hereafter 
prove ? Perhaps, an endless torture, 
compared to which, the pangs of con- 
science would be a blessed state of mind*" * 

The 



THE ABBESS. 53 

The idea was too dreadful, and be 
endeavoured to dissipate the thought. 
Such was the effect love had produced 
on Giuseppe's soul. The idea of re- 
venge vanished before the potent charm ; 
he forgot a mother's injuries; he ad- 
duced no arguments to warrant the fla- 
grant act of murder, though he had be- 
fore conceived himself empowered to 
judge, condemn, and punish the of- 
fender. 

At night he obeyed the marchese's 
command, and repaired to his closet; 
but his astonishment was great, on be- 
holding his father and Felippo both pre- 
pared to accompany him. They de- 
scended in silence, and entered a car- 
riage, which stood at the gate of the 
hotel, which drove off with the great- 
est velocity. They frequently changed 
horses during the night, but took little 
refreshment on the road, and scarcely 
D 3 one 



54 THE ABBESS. 

one word escaped either the marchese 
or Felippo. 

From the window of the carriage, Ca- 
zini anxiously watched the gradual ap- 
proach of day. Night's sable robe wa? 
not spangled with celestial gems, nor did 
the silvery sphere, moving in the bound- 
less expanse, shed forth her mild rays : a 
murky gloom involved each object in 
impenetrable darkness, and, ere the first 
dawn of morning, the o'ercharged atmo- 
sphere unburthened itself in a plenteous 
fall of rain. Swiftly the clouds dis- 
persed, when in the east arose a grey 
light. Gradually appeared sweet dim- 
ple-cheeked Aurora, when soon the saf- 
fron tint assumes the rose's dye. Now 
her light azure, thickly with golden 
streaks beset, adorns the enlightened 
hemisphere. 

The early tenants of the wood carol 
their melodious matin song ; and as their 

light 



THE ABBESS. 55 

light forms wave the tender spray, trem- 
bling drop their dewy pearls, spangling 
the earth's green surface. Forth from the 
liquid bosom of the briny deep, bursts 
forth the fiery -fronted sun ; his floating 
bulk tremendous, illumines the immen- 
sity of expanse; his ardent countenance 
defies man's prying eye ; even his bright 
rays dazzle our astonished sight, as awe- 
struck, we bow before the unsearchable 
mover of the whole. 

Cazini's noble mind was warmed with 
an enthusiastic glow; his grateful heart 
internally offered a thankful prayer — his 
soul was elevated to his Maker. Long 
did he continue thus entranced, his ex- 
uberant brain wildly roving in fancy's 
flowery field. At length the vision 
faded, his thoughts returned to sublu- 
nary objects ; dejectedly his head sunk 
upon his heaving bosom— Cazini remem- 
bered he was but mortal. 

d4 The 



56 THE ABBESS. 

The marchese Monti and his brother 
Felippo continued absorbed in the same 
gloomy silence. Cazini took an old ro- 
mance from his pocket, and, after care- 
lessly turning over several leaves, stop- 
ped at a page, which instantly engaged 
his attention ; the subject was as fol- 
lows : — 



A FRAGMENT, 

" Ruffle not her gentle slumbers, ye 
visions, that appal by night Let her 
dreams be pleasing," said the virtuous 
youth ; " for, oh ! she is the secret mo- 
ver of my soul. Wave not her glossy 
locks, ye sighing breezes ! still let them 
negligently twine her lily neck ; for 
my love is most gentle among the 
daughters of men. Sleep, oh, sleep, my 
Monzaga ; thy knight watches by thee. 
I will hover o'er thee, as the dove fos- 
tering its young ; but should aught as- 
sail my love, more furious than the 

galled 



THE ABBESS. 57 

galled boar, by hunters chased, or the 
fanged tigress of its whelps bereft. Til 
tear the base intruder. Sure thy fleet- 
ing fancy wanders to me; a cherub's 
smile trembles on thy dew-spangled lip. 
Oh that I might kiss that roseate 
mouth ! No — the purity of my flame 
forbids the theft; I should awaken my 
snow-tinctured maiden. The dying 
sound of gentlest music, gliding o'er 
the surface of a moon-reflecting stream, 
is not so soft as the voice of her I 
adore. The sparkling nectar on chaste 
Dian's lip, vies not with the sweetness 
of her mouth. Her blue eyes mock the 
dew-dripping violet's tint. She is fleet 
as the dusky roe, that bounds o'er the 
heath ; she is graceful as the willow 
waving in the wind. Such is my beau- 
teous fair one, such the idol of my soul. 
But, soft! she moves; her languishing 
eyes unclose; my heart is gladdened 
with their azure beams ; how does my 
maid of lily hue ?" 

D 5 « My 



58 THE ABBESS. 

** My visions were heavenly," said the 
damsel ; " for I dreamt of thee, my 
love. But let us arise from the damp 
green turf. Again I'll climb the steepy 
hills. With thee I'll chase the horn- 
branching stag. Phoebus yet tops the 
distant mountains — our fleet hounds are 
ready for the course — come, my love, 
let us awav." 

As a lightning- struck oak, the knight 
dropped his head; as the fond mo- 
ther weeping o'er her lifeless babe, so 
he became sad. — "Howl forth the 
sound, ye winds — let the words issue 
from the bosom of rocks," cried the 
youth ; " I cannot breathe them to my 
love." 

Quickly she seized his robe — looked 
wistful in his face, and then reclined 
her head upon his bosom. His sinewy 
arm twined her slim waist ; his hand 
locked one of hers. Monzaga's cheek 
was moistened with his tears ; her heart 
sickened, and her faltering tongue, in 

tremulous 



THE ABBESS. 59 

tremulous accents, breathed forth her 
hero's name. 

Sad was the soul of the gentle knight. 
As the keen blast nips the blooming 
rose, so had the touch of sorrow wither- 
ed his bleeding heart. — " Be comforted !" 
he cried ; his voice was not heard, for 
the maid was folded in misery's arms. 
" I go but for a season, Monzaga ; soon 
shall we meet again ; my glave shall 
then be sheathed for ever. The time is 
come — this night I must depart — my 
honour's pledged. How will my love 
glory, when my brow is again graced 
with the victor's wreath ! thy father 
too, renown'd in fame, will give thee to 
my arms for ever. Such is the oath he 
swore to me, upon his thigh-kissing 
weapon, as in the bloody field the 
dazzling sun gleamed full upon its glit- 
tering blade." 

" Court not the battle's heat," ex- 
claimed the maid, " quit not again thy 
chill-struck Monzaga ; for never shall I 
D 6 see 



60 THE ABBESS. 

see thee more — never wilt thou grace 
my father's board ; the hills will not 
re-echo with the dulcet sound of thy 
bugle; thy fleet dogs ne'er will bound 
the turf, nor wind the mazes of the 
gloomy forest. Never shall I rest me in 
the shade by yon cool brook, nor will 
its gentle rippling lull my soul to sleep ; 
never more wilt thou sit beside me and 
press this hand ; no, no, thou ne'er wilt 
see Monzaga more." 

The knight to his bosom pressed the 
maid, and bore her fainting to her fa- 
ther's hall. His arms were all prepared ; 
his courser stood without the court-yard. 
Soon his limbs were girt with pondrous 
steel ; again he speeded to the presence 
of his love. Her aged parent held him 
to his heart, and then renewed his oath. 
The youth approached, he bent his 
knee, and softly pressed Monzaga's lily 
hand. His touch thrilled her soul ; she 
started from her trance, and threw her- 
self within his open arms. Oft they 

kissed 



THE ABBESS. 6l 

kissed and breathed their vows — oft re- 
newed their tender protestations. Now 
he broke from her loved embrace ; she 
screamed ; the sound recalled him, and 
again he flew towards her. Her father 
could not bear the sight ; he waved his 
hand ; the weeping damsels in their 
arms supported Monzaga from his pre- 
sence. Her voice echoed through the 
hall ; her words chilled the sorrowing 
youth — " Farewell, farewell ! Monzaga 
bids thee adieu for ever !'* 

Swift the knight rushed forth ; he 
vaulted his war-steed ; the noble crea- 
ture felt his well-known lord upon his 
back. Impetuous he bounded cross the 
drawbridge, and scouring o'er the heath, 
soon bore his rider far from Monzaga's 
loved abode. 



A ROMANCE 



62 THE ABBESS. 

H Romance l^allair 



BLACK PLUMED KNIGHT AND MONZAGA 
THE MAID OF LILY HUE. 

Lady fair, with pity listen ! 

To Monzaga's tale give ear : 
May such woes ne'er chill thy bosom ; 

May'st thou shed the pitying tear ! 



Though you boast the rose's colour. 

Mingled with the lily's dye ; 
Though your locks be soft and waving. 

Azure tinctur'd your chaste eye. 

Though your coral lips, half open, 

Polish'd ivory display ; 
Though your gentle breath be scented 

With the perfum'd sweets of May. 

Though your form be slim and graceful ; 

Though with Venus' charms you're ray'd ; 
All combin'd you're not more perfect 

Than the lily-tinctur'd maid. 

If you're stamp'd with honour's signet. 

If your soul bear virtue's dye. 
Then with lily-cheek'd Monzaga, 

You, oh peerless dame, may vie. 

Long 



THE ABBESS. 68 

Long she moum'd her lost knight's absence. 
Sighing forth his much-lov'd name ; 

Whilst the val'rous youth was reaping 
Glory and immortal fame. 

Twofold sorrow then assail'd her ; 

Icy age's chilling breath 
Shook Monzaga's hoary parent, 

Soon, alas ! he slept in death. 

Calm she bore the will of Heaven, 

Bowing at its dread decree ; 
Unremitting prayers she oflfer'd 

Meekly on her bended knee. 

Clarion Fame her worth recording. 

Lords and knights with love were fir'd ; 

Many strove to win her favour — 
None the tender flame inspir'd. 

Now 111 sing the storied ballad 

Of a gloomy black-plumed knight, 

Whose proud front, and limbs gigantic. 
Were with sable arms bedight. 

On his helm a spreading plumage, 
Waving fann'd the ambient air : 

Glossy feathers pluck'd from raven 
Was the crest he us'd to wear. 



On 



6^! THE ABBESS. 

On his front a casque of iron 

Veil'd his furrow'd brow so dire : 

Pent within his close-lock'd beaver, 
RoU'd his eyes like ardent fire. 

Ponderous mail of linked iron 
Round his body rattling hung : 

From his shoulders a broad target 
O'er his back was loosely slung. 

Jointed plates with thongs of leather. 
On his sinew'd limbs were lac'd : 

Round his loins a broad belt buckled, 
Which his massive weapon brac'd. 

Oft he strode a fiery courser. 

Sleek and of the ebon dye ; 
Bristle-man'd and nostril snorting, 

Foam-mouth'd, red, fire-gleaming eye. 

Hugely fram'd and toughly jointed, 

FuU-vein'd, broad-back'd, large of bone. 

Hoofs that tore the earth's green bosom — 
Hoofs that rent the rugged stone. 

Such the dreadful black-plum'd knight was. 
Who was lord of Gonda's steep. 

Whose proud turrets soar'd to heaven. 
Frowning on the glassy deep. 

Zalba'j 



THE ABBESS. 65 

Zalba's gentle rippling waters, 

Gonda's rugged base did lave. 
Gloomy mantled towers reflecting 

On its smooth and silv'ry wave. 

None his castle dar'd to enter. 

He alone therein did dwell : 
Festive mirth ne'er rung those chambers ; 

All was drear as death's dark cell. 

One only sound the silence broke, 
'Twas the gloomy deep-ton'd bell ; 

That summoned shrouded spectres forth. 
Screaming at the direful knell. 

Then the knight his pond'rous helmet 
From his low'ring front would draw. 

Which display 'd his lank pale visage. 
Striking fear and chilling awe. 

Bristly locks his temples shaded. 

Bushy brows his large eyes crown'd. 

Which, within their sockets moving, 
Roll'd like fiery spheres around. 

Death's hue o'erspread his meagre face. 
Pale and furrow 'd was his skin ; 

His nose was long and aquiline. 
Hollow was his cheek and thin. 

His 



66 THE ABBESS. 

His open'd mouth large teeth display'd. 
On his pointed chin appeared 

A rugged grizzly tuft of hair. 

Which Time's hoary hand had sear'd. 

Of Monzaga's heav'nly features. 
Of her skin so wond'rous fair. 

Of her eye so chastely beaming. 
Of her virtues passing rare— 

These by fame so oft repeated, 

Fir'd this knight of sable plume : 

She, his hateful love refusing, 

Fiird his soul v^rith horrid gloom. 

Direst hate his black mind harbour'd. 
In his breast revengeful ire 

'Gainst Monzaga, lovely maiden. 
Burnt with most malignant fire. 

Soon he planned his horrid purpose ; 

Silent in the dead of night. 
To Monzaga's peaceful mansion. 

Stole the grim and murd'rous knight. 

All were hush'd in softest slumbers. 
Save Monzaga, gentle maid. 

Who, before the chapel's altar. 
O'er her beads devoutly pray'd. 



Thither 



THE ABBESS. 67 

Thither by the pale reflection 

Of the lamp's blue trembling light, 

Cautious stole the black-arm'd warrior, 
To the maiden fair and bright. 

Now she views his lengthened shadow 
O'er the pavement swiftly glide ; 

Now she trembling sinks with terror ; 
Lo ! the knight stands at her side. 

Now his arm her waist encircles — 

From the chapel swift he flies. 
Vain she struggles and intreats him. 

Vainly rends the air with cries. 

Quick he vaults his tall black courser. 

With Monzaga at his side ; 
Now he spurs his jetty bearer. 

Fleet as wind o'er hills they glide. 

Now they course o'er heaths so dreary. 
Now they climb dread rocks so steep ; 

Now they glide through forests gloomy. 
Now they plunge in torrents deep. 

Soon as Gonda's gates they enter. 
Straight the gloomy ruffian hies. 

To a dungeon, damp and dreary. 
Bears his pallid fear-struck prize. 

" Now, 



68 THE ABBESS. 

" Now, proud lily-cheek'd Monzaga," 
Cried the knight, with sullen voice, 

" Quickly yield thy beauties to me. 
Or grim death's alone thy choice." 

" Yield to thee, thou horrid monster !" 
With indignant look she cried ; 

" No, with dust 111 gladly mingle, 
I'll become death's willing bride." 

Thrice her chastity he tempted. 
Little his dire strength avail'd ; 

She was trebly arm'd with virtue — 
All his lustful efforts fail'd. 

Furious grown, to earth he struck her, 
Seiz'd her loose dishevell'd hair ; 

Now Monzaga nam'd her lover. 

Then to Heaven breath'd forth a prayer. 

Now his direful hand uplifted, 

Brandish'd the death-dooming glave ; 

All her tears, her angel figure. 
Naught avail'd her life to save. 

The sharp edge her neck assailing. 
Streaming flow'd the purple gore ; 

Stiff to earth her corse then falling, 
Her pale head the murd'rer bore. 



Such 



THE ABBESS. 6*9 

Such his wicked hell-fraught soul was. 

Such his cruelty and rage ; 
Her death his vengeance had not quench'd. 

All could not his ire assuage. 

Still, whene'er the sullen clapper. 
Beat the dreary midnight hour, 

A lambent flame of pallid hue, 

Gleam'd from each embattl'd tower. 

Lofty casements brilliant shining. 
Cast a faint and trembling light ; 

Groans were heard, the turrets rocking. 
Then appear'd the sable knight. 

Lo ! his right hand grasp'd the rapier. 
All besmear'd with purple gore ; 

Snowy veil of fair Monzaga, 

Twin'd around his arm he wore. 

In his left hand, all appalling. 
Rude he grasp'd her clotted hair. 

Which alive, her front adorning. 
Purple turned, though once so fair. 

Slow he pass'd the chambers spacious. 

Then the dreary vaulted halls. 
Grimly hung black suits of armour, 

Rang'd against the damp green walls. 

Last 



70 THE ABBESS. 

Last the dungeon he would visit ; 

There with a malignant grin. 
Loud he'd taunt the mould'ring body. 

Vaunting his abhorred sin. 

Glory's son, meanwhile returning. 
Ne'er display'd the victor's pride ; 

Love his beacon — only craving 
Chaste Monzaga for his bride. 

Soon he gain'd the well-known castle. 
Soon he learnt the dreadful truth ; 

Madness fiU'd the throbbing bosom. 
Of the noble-minded youths 

Through the world he vow'd to seek her, 
Two long years he vainly strove ; 

Anguish tore his manly bosom, 
Lo ! he join'd his lily love. 



His bright arms gleamed bluely, re- 
flecting the moon's pale beams. The 
knight continued immersed in deep 
contemplation, as his long-maned steed 
proceeded o'er the black heath. 

Soon a gloomy forest met his course ; 
he entered, when the moon became veil- 
ed 



THE ABBESS. 71 

ed by the dark green tufted canopy, 
thickly spreading o'er his head. The 
sullen breeze whistled through the fo- 
liage, and ever and anon was heard the 
snorting of his courser. Still louder 
howled the chilling wind — the leaves 
rustled — the distant thunders rolled — 
the lightning vivid gleamed, pierced the 
forest's gloom, and torrents spouted from 
the lowering atmosphere. The knight 
applied the goading spur — his proud 
bearer, foaming, bounded, and, as his 
large hoofs struck the dew-dripping turf, 
the rattling of his rider's arms still urged 
his pace. Onward he hied, the storm 
continuing with redoubled violence. 
Long he proceeded in his course, till 
wind and thunder both were hushed, 
and rain no longer fell. The knight 
stayed the fleetness of his horse, patted, 
with iron-mantled hand, his bowed 
neck, then stroked his bristled mane : 
suddenly he started— a sound was heard; 
again it was repeated; a distant bell, 

with 



72 THE ABBESS. 

with sullen note, chimed forth the mid- 
night hour. 

The knight bent his way towards the 
dreary sound ; again the watery moon 
gleamed forth, when he beheld the 
lofty embattled turrets of a castle. Now 
a faint waving light beamed from the 
arched casements. The knight ap- 
proached the uplifted drawbridge; 
loudly he called, but the echo of his 
voice died in the midnight blast ; he re- 
peated the summons, but no answer 
was returned. At length, he beheld a 
broad-rimmed iron shield, by a rusty 
chain suspended to the knotted trunk 
of a withered tree, whose leafless 
branches, bending o'er the broad moat's 
glassy surface, reflected on its bosom 
their fantastic forms. 

The knight sprang from his steed; 
the clatter of his arms echoed around : 
from his girdle he drew forth his mas- 
sive faulchion ; he approached — his 
nerved arm struck with violence the 

iron 



THE ABBESS. 73 

iron plate. Like stream impetuous, 
whose intercepted course foaming, rat- 
tles down a rugged steep, or pealing 
thunder heard from the summit of a 
cloud- mantled hill, issued a bellowing 
sound : the words resounded, and the 
castle's drear courts rung with the hor- 
rid din. 

The drawbridge moved — the chains 
grated on their rollers. The knight af- 
fixed his neighing courser to a tree, and 
boldly passed the moat ; but found the 
castle gates were locked. Thrice he 
struck the brazen plate, when slowly 
on its hinges moved the portal : he 
paused — for no hand was seen. 

He defied fear's chilling impulse, and 
sternly proceeded across the court-yard. 
Two folding doors stood open wide; 
he entered, and slowly ascended a broad 
oak staircase. At the top, a spacious 
hall presented itself to his view: he 
passed on, when his eye was struck with 
numerous coats of sable mail, ranged 

VOL. III. E along 



74 THE ABBESS. 

along the walls. He continued his 
course — suddenly the moon became ob- 
scured by a rain-fraught cloud, and all 
was involved in darkness. 

A hollow groan was heard. The 
knight unsheathed his polished glaive ; 
again a noise seemed to approach ; he 
listened attentively, but all was silent : 
again he heard a groan — it was repeat- 
ed, and footsteps lightly glided o'er the 
pavement. 

*' Who passes ?" cried the knight. 

A pause ensued. 

Instantaneously a lambent flame illu- 
mined the chamber. The knight beheld 
at his side a human form, completely 
veiled. — " What art thou ?" exclaimed 
he. 

A deep-fetched groan was the only 
answer to his interrogatory. 

" In God I place my only trust," 
continued he; " Christ is my Redeem- 
er ; if wicked, therefore, I fear thee not ; 

if 



THE ABBESS. f5 

if good, unburthen thy wrongs, and 
speak to me." 

Slowly the figure bowed its head ; 
then raising its robed arm, beckoned 
him. 

Dauntless the knight followed its 
steps, the same light still flitting before 
them. They traversed vaulted halls, 
spacious chambers, and mounted noble 

flights of steps 

still the 

figure waved him forward with courte- 
ous motion. They entered a dreary 
passage ; having wound through its in- 
tricate mazes, the knight still following, 
descended a flight of steps ; a door flew 
open, and the female led him into a 
magnificent but long-neglected chapel ; 
it made a halt in the centre of the grand 
aisle. The pavement trembled beneath 
his feet ; a stone slowly moved aside, 
when an iron grating appeared, which 
the knight having removed, the figure 
led him to a dreary dungeon. Here it 
E 2 paused, 



76 THE ABBESS. 

paused, and, groaning, pointed to the 
earth. The knight following the motion 
of its hand, beheld extended on the 
ground a mouldering headless corse ! 

He shuddered at the sight ; raising 
his eyes, he started back — the spectre 
had withdrawn its hitherto-encircling 
veil. The knight groaned— he remem- 
bered the pallid countenance before him 
— it was his destined bride, the lily- 
cheeked Monzaga, whom he had vainly 
sought, full two long years ! 

Her beauteous neck was gashed 
around, and from the gaping wound a 
purple stream seemed issuing ! 

Prostrate fell the knight ; his soul was 
torn with anguish. — " Is this Monzaga? 
— is this my love ?" did he exclaim. 
" What barbarous hand could strike thy 
neck so fair ? Oh ! thou wert once thin 
as the spiral poplar ! thy motion was 
graceful as the willow, bending over the 
bosom of streams ! soft were thy golden 
locks, as swan's downy bosom ; thy blue 

eyes 



THE ABBESS. 77 

eyes beamed chastity, like night's silver 
orb ! Fairest was thou of lilies — sweet- 
est was my Monzaga — most virtuous 



I" 



among women i 

The spectre cast its deadened eyes 
with seeming pity on the knight — a 
sigh escaped its bosom. He could not 
refrain ; he arose — his arms were open 
to clasp the shadow of his still-adored 
Monzaga. Suddenly a chilly tremor 
ran through his veins, hollow groans, 
piercing shrieks, and dismal yells, re- 
sounded through the vault, the earth 
trembled — the chapel clock tolled one — 
the spectre vanished. 

The knight was left in total darkness. 
He smote his noble bosom — against his 
breast he placed the sharp-edged steel — 
lie would have pierced his throbbing 
heart, but felt his arm withheld. Again 
a gleam illumined the dungeon walls, 
on which a blood-coloured cross appear- 
ed. He dropped the weapon, and 
E 3 sought 



78 THE ABBESS. 

sought by prayer to appease Heaven's 
vengeance for the rash attempt. 

Again the dungeon was obscured in 
gloom. The knight felt comfort ; his 
offering w^as received ; the hand of 
Heaven was upon him. 

'* Yet, why did she fly me?" ex- 
claimed he — " why leave me like the 
fleeting chaff* borne on the winged 
winds ? I am among men the child of 
sorrow^; grief and melancholy are my 
sisters, and thy damp grave, Monzaga, 
is now my dwelling." Adown his gor- 
get rolled the dewy tears. ." Never 
more will the moss-banked fountain hear 
me sigh forth my love : never more shall 
my proud steed bear me against the foe. 
I'll watch thy tomb, Monzaga ; thy 
bones shall rest in peace; no chilling 
breeze shall nip the budding flower. I 
will protect the hallowed turf By 
night I'll watch the coming of thy airy 
form, till death's chill hand shall dim 
my sight for ever. Oh ! my spirit soon 

will 



THE ABBESS. T9 

will join thee, love : one bank shall 
mark our graves." 

Long did the knight pause; his heart 
with difficulty bore the conflicting pangs 
that wrung it. Suddenly his cheek 
reduced; his dark eyes glared terribly. 

** Where, where," cried he, " is the 
detested monster? — where is the mur- 
derer of my love ? give him to my ven- 
geance: though he be cased in adamant, 
this arm shall tear forth his grimed 
heart, and give his soul to endless tor- 
ture." 

He rushed from the dungeon, and 
soon gained the chapel. Swift as light- 
ning he traversed each lonely hall and 
desolate chamber. He mounted the 
lofty battlements, his voice still echoing 
Monzaga's name, and calling for the 
murderer of his love. 

He once more entered the dear hall 

where first the spectre had appeared ; he 

recollected the spot, and threw himself 

upon the cold pavement. Soon he heard 

E 4f the 



80 THE ABBESS. 

the clatter of distant arms. He arose : 
a waving light proceeded from the grand 
oak staircase. He approached the por- 
tal of the hall — he started back with 
horror — the black-plumed knight ap- 
peared, bearing the withered head of 
the lily-hued Monzaga. The dreadful 
murderer looked terribly upon the youth, 
and then moved slowly onward to- 
wards the chapel. The virtuous knight 
remained transfixed to the spot. 

At length he drew forth his battle- 
axe, and rushed impetuously after the 
destroyer of his love. 

He gained the dungeon, at the mo- 
ment when the sable villain vented cur- 
ses on Monzaga, and gloried in the atro- 
city of his guilt. 

" Wretch ! have I found thee ?" vo- 
ciferated the virtuous youth. 

The black knight, with contemptuous 
look, eyed him awhile. — " Begone," at 
length he cried; " stripling avaunt, or 
soon thy fleeting spirit, ebbing with 

thine 



THE ABBESS. 81 

thine heart's blood, shall join Monzaga's 
wandering ghost." 

Rage nerved the youth's arm ; he 
struck his target, in token of defiance, 
then furious made towards his foe. 
Dreadful was the contest; love fired the 
virtuous youth — hatred boiled in the 
black bosom of the gigantic knight. 
Soon their iron-knobbed targets shiver- 
ed beneath their sturdy blows; their 
weapons became entangled; they wrest- 
led ; each relinquished his battle-axe, 
and from his girdle drew his well-tem- 
pered glaive. The contest commenced 
with redoubled violence ; either felt the 
blood trickle from his wounds. They 
closed, and in that moment each re- 
ceived in his bosom the death-dooming 
steel. 

The knight of the sable plume died, 
groaning forth execrations. The vir- 
tuous youth sunk by the ashes of his 
love, and sighing forth her name, ex- 
pired, 

E 5 Frantic, 



82 THE ABBESS. 

Frantic, the spirit of these lovers 
haunt at midnight the drear courts of 
Gonda. Lashes of ever-burning iron 
in their hands they bear; swift through 
each hall and chamber they drive the 
wicked spirit of the sable knight, and 
thus torment him till the toll of one. 
Then they drop their ardent weapons ; 
their features resume their wonted sweet- 
ness ; reclining on a faint beam of the 
silvery moon, they mount to regions of 
etherial bliss. 

Lady, their bones are now at rest. A 
rose and lily spring upon the sod that 
wraps their mortal dust. A rippling 
brook bubbles hard by. Two doves 
have taken shelter in the overhanging 
wood, and every night the chaste bird 
warbles his melodious melancholy strain. 
Sometimes you may view them gliding 
o'er the turf, like the thin vapour on 
the bosom of unruffled waters ; but like 
the dew-sipping sunbeam, they vanish 
at the approach of morn. 

My 



THE ABBESS. 88 

My soul adores thee, most tender of 
thy sex. Thou art lovely as Monzaga ; 
may thy knight prove as true, but may 
thy name ne'er find a place in Misery's 
page! may thy spirit, like hers, wrapt 
in a silver ray, move upwards with the 
airy form of him thou lovest !" 



Cazini closed the book ; various ideas 
crowded on his fancy, which totally oc- 
cupied him for some hours: they at 
length arrived at the place of their 
destination. 

The carriage slowly proceeded through 
several noble streets, and stopped at a 
mansion ; here they alighted, and were 
conducted into a small but elegant 
apartment. During some time, the same 
sullen behaviour was observed by the 
marchese and Felippo. Giuseppe at 
length requested to be made acquainted 
E 6 with 



84 THE ABBESS. 

with the name of the city wherein they 
had taken up their residence. 

" You are now in Florence," return- 
ed his father ; " vou breathe the same 
air as the hateful viper that seduced 
your mother. 'Tis here you must 
avenge your own and your father's in- 
juries ; and 'tis here you, and you alone, 
must be acquainted with the cause of 
this hasty change of situation." 

He then, after a conversation of con- 
siderable length, in which the violent 
emotions of his breast were visible, made 
Giuseppe acquainted with a circum- 
stance that gave him the utmost pain. 
In a few days after, the marchese and 
Felippo disappeared, their residence be- 
ing known only to Giuseppe, who was 
enjoined to maintain the strictest secre- 
cy. His father, with unremitting care, 
continued to inculcate the doctrine of 
revenge — spies were sent to watch the 

duca's 



THE ABBESS. 85 

duca's motions. His journey to the 
castello di Valdarno was adjudged by 
the marchese to be a fit opportunity. 
The sequel of Giuseppe's attempt has 
been already explained. 



CHAP. 



86 THE ABBESS. 



CHAP. II. 

A fury crawl'd from out her horrid eel!, 

The bloodiest minister of death and hell ; 

Huge fuU-gorg'd snakes on her lean shoulders hbng, 

And death's dark courts with their loud hissings rung. 

Her teeth and claws were iron, and her breath, 

Like subterranean damps, gave present death. 

Flames, worse than hell's, shot from her bloody eyes, 

And fire and sword eternally she cries. 

Horror, till now the ugliest shape esteem'd. 

So much outdone, a harmless figure seem'd. 

Envy, and hate, and malice, blush'd to see, 

Themselves eclips'd by such deformity. 

Her fev'rish thirst drinks down a sea of blood, 

Not of the impious, but the just and good. 

Blackmore. 

During the space of ten days Madda- 
lena Rosa was again twice summoned 
before the table of the Holy Office. 
Her answers to the several interrogato- 
ries were similar to those she had already 
deposed. 

The 



THE ABBESS. 87 

The conte Marcello was also re-ex- 
amined, at two separate times, by the 
inquisitors. They exhorted, they threat- 
ened, and used every art they could in- 
vent, to draw from him a confession of 
the secret ; but he either answered as he 
had before done, or remained silent, 
when they questioned him on any sub- 
ject connected with his oath. 

During the days that intervened be- 
tween each examination, the conte was 
repeatedly visited in his dungeon, either 
by an inquisitor, a Dominican monk, 
or one of those despicable wretches 
known by the name of Bargellos, who, 
under the specious and pretended garb 
of friendship, and seeming pity for the 
miserable sufferer's fate, artfully insinuate 
themselves, to draw from him a full 
confession. 

Sometimes these monsters assume the 
garb and appearance of a fellow-cap- 
tive; 



88 THE ABBESS. 

tive; sometimes they title themselves 
high in office, and that their power can 
free persons accused before this tribunal ; 
at others, they seem to feel a particular 
interest in the fate of him, from whom 
they would draw the truth, and that 
their compassion prompts them to un- 
dertake this kind office. These detested 
hypocrites will even weep, and call pro- 
fanely on Heaven to witness how much 
they sympathize in the prisoner's woes. 
They will allege, that the supreme in- 
quisitor is some near relative, and a man 
whose soul abounds with charity; and 
that, by then privately confessing his 
crime, he will receive absolution, and be 
immediately freed from his prison. If, 
by any of these arts, the unsuspecting 
criminal be led to divulge the truth, a 
secretary is always placed at the door of 
the dungeon, who carefully notes down 
every word the prisoner thus inadver- 
tently utters. 

Such 



THE ABBESS. 89 

Such arts did not operate upon the 
conte's mind. On the appearance of 
these subtle adherents to the cause of 
religion, he remained silent, nor once 
deigned to answer a single question. 
Wearied out, at length, with fruitless 
endeavours, the hypocrites left the dun- 
geon, intreating the conte would re- 
member them, should he stand in need 
of a friend. 

Several days elapsed after the conte's 
third interrogatory, during which period 
he remained unmolested in his cell, till 
he was one night awakened by the ap- 
pearance of two officials, who command- 
ed him to rise and follow them. They 
slowly quitted the dungeon, at the door 
of which, one of his conductors took a 
torch from the gaoler, and proceeded 
onwards. The conte followed, and the 
other official after him. 

They traversed several gloomy pas- 
sages. 



90 THE ABBESS. 

sages, no otherwise illuminated than by 
the flambeau which the official bore, and 
the chilling dampness of the place greatly 
diminished the effect of the light. They 
descended a long winding staircase, and 
again proceeded along several passages 
more damp than the former. They then 
arrived at a small door, where a familiar 
appeared. The glare from the torch 
struck full upon his countenance, which, 
contrasted with the dingy garments he 
wore, gave him a peculiar air of ferocity. 
He fixed his dreadful eyes scowlingly 
on the conte's visage, and, in a loud 
voice, exclaimed—" Who is it ye con- 
duct?" 

The official, who preceded Marcello 
Porta, replied — "One who is irrevoca- 
bly lost, if grace enlighten not his soul. 
May the last effiDrts of our sacred tribu- 
nal reclaim his obduracy !" 

The familiar crossed himself, and 
opened the door. 

As 



THE ABBESS. 9J 

As the conte passed the threshold, he 
received a blow on the shoulder. He 
hastily turned, when the officer cried 
aloud — " Remember Him who was re- 
viled for our transgressions, and let the 
recollection teach thee to repent!" 

They then entered a spacious vault, 
from which branched numerous avenues, 
in every direction. The conte's ear wias 
assailed with most dismal groans and 
shrieks, that pierced his inmost soul. 
His blood recoiled ; a chilly moisture 
bedewed his frame, and his trembling 
limbs almost refused their office ! 

The familiars, as if to increase his 
emotion, made a halt for some moments. 
They at length moved forwards, and en- 
tered one of the narrow passages; the 
dreadful cries still continued ! Now 
they died away in distance. The offi- 
cial suddenly extinguished the light, 

and 



92 THE ABBESS. 

and every thing was involved in utter 
darkness. 



At the same instant a loud noise was 
heard. The conte paused, and a death- 
like silence ensued. Some moments 
elapsed, when, summoning resolution, 
he called aloud to his conductors; but 
the receding echo alone interrupted the 
stillness that surrounded him. 

He remained a considerable time in 
this situation, when, on a sudden, his 
arms were seized, and he was forcibly 
hurried along the avenue. A door was 
thrown open, and the conte found him- 
self in a square vault, the walls of which 
were hung with black, and illuminated 
by four lamps, placed at each angle. 

Opposite the side by which the conte 
entered, stood a table, at which were 
seated the grand inquisitor, the secretary, 
and the inspector. Four men, remark- 
ably 



THE ABBESS. Q3 

ably tall of stature, stood, with folded 
arms, on either side of the table; they 
were habited in garments of black linen, 
tied round the middle with a thick rope 
of red twisted worsted. The dress was 
so contrived, as to cover the feet ; their 
faces were likewise concealed by a cowl, 
in which were two small cavities to ad- 
mit the light. These familiars, resem- 
bling demons, whose office it was to tor- 
ture, inspired the conte with momentary 
horror. On the pavement were several 
instruments and ropes, of various di- 
mensions ; large pulleys were fixed to 
the ceiling and walls of this chamber, 
and the cords, that were suspended from 
these, were clotted with blood. There 
appeared more than a dozen entrances 
to this vault of slaughter. 

The conte was ordered to approach 
the table, and he silently obeyed. 

" You have particularly experienced 

the 



^4 THE ABBESS. 

the lenity of this tribunal," said the 
supreme inquisitor, addressing him, 
" for you have been thrice summoned 
before us; we have used exhortation, 
and absolved you from the oath. Some 
of pur brothers, steadfast in the faith, 
and full of charity, have kindly visited 
you in your dungeon ; notwithstanding 
which, we still find you callous to all 
their arguments: you refuse our prof- 
fered mercy, and thereby compel us to 
pursue those measures which we would 
willingly forego. The crime, Marcello 
Porta, wherewith you stand accused, is 
of the most flagrant nature : the act it- 
self you have freely confessed, but deny 
the alleged manner and reason for doing 
that act. First, it being adduced, that 
through Maddalena's interest, you ob- 
tained admittance; secondly, that your 
visit was to converse and forcibly con- 
vey a boarder from the convent — both 
which accusations you contradict. But, 
when I demand the proof of your in- 
nocence. 



THE ABBESS. 95 

nocence, the answers you give are 
vague and unsatisfactory. You assert, 
that there are secret enemies, who plot 
your ruin ; and yet refuse to divulge 
their names : you swear that you are 
guitless, and, though empowered by 
this tribunal, will not confute the accu- 
sations brought against you. What in- 
ference can be drawn from such answers, 
but that the whole is a fabrication, and 
base attempt to impose on your judges? 
for your guilt is established beyond a 
doubt. You love Maddalena Rosa, and 
if your suggestions were true, you sub- 
ject her to punishment, by your contu- 
macy. A villain would not act thus 
towards the object of his affection ; how 
much less should the noble Marcello 
Porta? An inquisitor may not be al- 
together unacquainted with those pas- 
sions which agitate the bosom of him 
who loves: he feels enraptured, when, in 
the presence of her he loves, the hours 
glide swiftly away, and he enjoys an un- 
interrupted 



96 THE ABBESS. 

interrupted state of bliss. If necessity, 
for a short period, call him from her 
presence, what are his emotions at part- 
ing, and his feelings during the term of 
absence ! But, should calamity assail, 
or sickness endanger her life, with what 
tenderness he strives to alleviate her 
cares ! or will he not, in the agony of 
grief, freely offer up himself a sacrifice 
to prolong the term of her existence ? 
and yet you, Marcello Porta, pretend to 
love — you behold the object lingering in 
a dungeon — her life endangered — and, 
what to a lover must be far more pre- 
cious, her honour accused. You are 
the cause of these sufferings; and, 
though enabled to release her, refuse it 
on a false punctilio of honour. Is such a 
conduct compatible with love ? No — it 
argues flagrant guilt ; for a lover would 
never act with such hardened cruelty 
and injustice." 

A look of disdain marked the fea- 
tures 



THE ABBESS. 



m 



tures of the inquisitor as he spoke, and 
his eyes were contemptuously bent on 
the conte, who had listened to the latter 
part of this address with the greatest as- 
tonishment. — " And is it, then, pos- 
sible," did he mentally exclaim, " that 
an ecclesiastical judge, in the perform- 
ance of his function, will thus delineate 
the emotions of the tenderest passion !'* 

The conte was unmindful, that those 
who undertake the supreme inquisitorial 
office must, in the one hand, grasp the 
poisoned bowl, the dagger, and flaming 
brand, and, in the other, bear the spe- 
cious mark of pity, to veil their deceit 
and inward depravity. 

One of the doors of the vault was 
shortly after opened, when a friar of the 
Dominicans entered, accompanied by 
that inquisitor who, during the several 
interrogatories, had appeared so forward 
in criminating the conte and Maddalena. 

VOL. in. F His 



98 THE ABBESS. 

His air was, if possible, more ferocious, 
and, as he took his station near the 
supreme judge, he frowned dreadfully . 
upon the conte ; but, turning his eyes 
towards the instruments of torture, a | 
ghastly smile depicted his countenance, \ 
as he anticipated the purpose to which 
they would soon be applied. { 

" Are you, then, determined, Mar- j 
cello Porta, to maintain this silence ? 
By the bowels of compassion, we entreat 
you, better to weigh the consequences : 
of such contumacious behaviour, which 
tends to render you more culpable in our 
eyes. If you are guilty of the crime, ' 
and there remains not a shadow of 
doubt as to the truth, confess that the 
alleged oath was merely a pretext to 
screen your conduct. Confide wholly in '• 
our mercy, and all we shall require of i 
you in return, is wholesome penance, j 
and sincere contrition. We would imi- 
tate the divine institutes of that sacred 

Being, 



THE ABBESS. 99 

Being, whose cause we are deputed to 
adjudge. 3Iisericordia is our motto to 
them who seek it ; Justitia the reward of 
those whose obstinacy draws down on 
them the wrath of offended Heaven." 

Such were the plausible arguments 
used to incite the conte to annul his 
oath ; but the meritorious conduct of 
this tribunal is such, that, if the inquisi- 
tors, by these specious promises, obtain 
a confession, they think themselves jus- 
tified, if they mitigate, in the smallest 
degree, the rigorous punishment annexed 
to the crime. Thus, if the prisoner's 
guilt, in their eyes, merits death, they 
will deliver him over to the secular arm, 
and, in performance of their promise, 
entreat that one faggot, in addition to 
the usual number, may be added to the 
pile, that the culprit may the sooner be 
relieved from his torments ; but they 
take the precaution of placing it at the 
extremity of the fire, so that, if con- 
F 2 sumed, 



100 THE ABBESS 

sumed, it affords no benefit to the wretch^ 
ed sufferer. 

After a pause of some length, the 
conte, in a firm tone, thus addressed the 
tribunal. — " Most holy lords inquisitors, 
after the determined silence I have main- 
tained during three examinations, after 
the solemn manner in which I have at- 
tested my innocence, and that of Madda- 
lena Rosa, it was my firm resolution to 
undergo every torture, ere I would again 
make answer to your interrogatories. 
But you now assert my guilt in peremp- 
tory terms ; you allege proofs, and fla- 
grant ones, against me ; you describe a 
lover's emotions, and thereby tax the 
purity of my conduct; but you forgot 
to expatiate on the theme of honour, 
that rigid sentiment, which alone re- 
strains me from a confession. The pas- 
sion which holds dominion over my 
heart, no powers of the most fertile ima- 
gination can describe; yet my honour 

still 



THE ABBESS. 101 

still predominates : death, I know, must 
be the alternative ; yet I will give my 
limbs to the torture, my body to the 
flames, that I may preserve my inte- 
grity unsullied. 'Twere better sacrifice 
my existence, than purchase it with ig- 
nominy." 

The inquisitor, who last entered the 
dungeon, exclaimed, in a voice of 
thunder — " Why should we submit to 
have our holy dignity thus insulted? 
I^et the torture be instantly inflicted." 

The officials then rudely seized the 
conte's arms. The Dominican friar now 
approached him ; he painted, in strong 
terms, the bodily anguish he must en- 
dure, and threatened the everlasting 
torments that would await him in a 
future state: but all was ineffectual; the 
conte remained unmoved. 

" Will you, Marcello Porta, confess?" 
demanded the supreme inquisitor. 

F 3 " I am 



102 THE ABBESS. 

" I am resolute," returned the eonte, 
" and will maintain eternal silence." 

" Put him to the question then," ex- 
claimed the judge. 

The familiars, in an instant, tore off 
the conte's habiliments, when a loose 
gown was thrown over his body. Cords 
encircled his wrists, which were then 
passed through pullies. Again the 
question was put ; but the conte refused 
to answer. 

" You obstinately resist our entreaties, 
and spurn the proffered mercy? Be 
then your death upon yourself, if you 
expire under the tortures !" 

The officials drew the ropes, and the 
conte was suspended by his hands to the 
ceiling. He was, for some moments, 
kept in this painful situation ; a bench 
was then placed beneath him, which 
supported, for a short time, the weight 

of 



THE ABBESS. 103 

of his body. During this interval, a 
ponderous mass of lead was attached to 
his ancles; the bench was suddenly 
pushed from under him — every limb was 
stretched in the most dreadful manner, 
and he experienced unutterable agonies ; 
yet he sustained them with fortitude— 
not a groan escaped his lips ; for reflec- 
tion told him, that he merited far great- 
er punishment, for having once shame- 
fully yielded to the madre's libidinous 
desires. 

During this torture, the question was 
repeatedly proposed; but the conte 
maintained a resolute silence. In an in- 
stant, the rope was slackened, and he 
came with violence to the pavement. 
The sudden jerk dislocated every joint; 
the torment was too acute, and an ago- 
nized groan escaped his lips. 

When the pain had, in some measure, 

subsided, and the conte was capable of 

F 4 reflection. 



104 THE ABBESS. 

reflection, his thoughts recurred with 
dread to the torture he had just endu- 
red, and those which were to succeed it. 
This idea was momentary ; for the re- 
collection of her sufferings who had 
once inhabited his dungeon — the he- 
roic fortitude of Bendetta Ca*zzala, came 
fresh to his recollection. He contemned 
the pusillanimity of his own conduct, in 
having, for a moment, yielded to the 
impulse of fear. — " What ! shall the de- 
licate frame of a female endure sufferings 
that intimidate the hardier sex?" 

At that moment, the loved Madda- 
lena's form presented itself to his fancy, 
and he mentally exclaimed — " Merciful 
powers ! shall my Rosa be exposed to 
these torments?" The supposition al- 
most deprived him of reason. — " No ; I 
will break my oath ; I will pass my days 
in ignominy; I will undergo any hu- 
miliation, rather than subject her to such 
cruelties. 

He 



THE ABBESS. 105 

He was roused from this train of ideas 
by the voice of the grand inquisitor. 
The conte opened his eyes, which had 
been closed till that moment, and found 
himself stretched upon his back on the 
floor. The torturers stood at his side 
with various in&amp;ruments, ready to con- 
tinue their dreadful employment. The 
faint light, that gleamed round the 
chamber, quite overpowered his senses; 
for the extreme perturbation of his mind 
had, till that instant, deadened his bo- 
dily anguish. He felt a rising sickness 
at his soul, which produced a chilling 
dew, that issued from every pore. This 
was succeeded by a raging fever ; all 
moisture dried within him, and, could 
he have then articulated a sentence, he 
would have sworn to divulge the secret, 
in the hope of obtaining one drop of 
water to moisten his burning lips. 

Whilst he remained in this state, the 

grand inquisitor several times addressed 

F 5 him. 



106 THE ABBESS. 

him, but the conte was unable to an- 
swer, and incapacitated from making the 
least motion. That dreadful inquisitor, 
who had accompanied the monk into 
the vault, and whose outward appear, 
ance was so exactly the counterpart of 
bis sanguinary mind, insisted vehemently, 
several times, that each torture should 
be inflicted without delay. The conte's 
silence he, even then, attributed to his 
contempt for the holy tribunal. The 
surgeon was summoned, who, having 
examined the conte, gave it as his opi- 
nion, that the concussion had been too 
violent, that the sufferer was then a 
prey to the most raging fever, and that 
he did not think it altogether prudent 
to continue the torture. 

" Are you then convinced that he 
would expire ?" demanded the same in- 
quisitor, in an angry tone. 

" I speak according to my belief," re- 
turned the surgeon. " I think all far- 
ther 



THE ABBESS. 107 

ther punishment should be remitted, 
though I cannot altogether assert, that 
the prisoner's life would be the forfeit, 
if it were inflicted." 

" Let the officials, then, do their 
duty !" cried the inquisitor. 

The machinations of his dark soul 
were visible in every feature. He had 
secret and powerful motives, that the 
conte Marcello might expire beneath 
his anguish, known only to himself. 
The officials were again preparing the 
instruments ; the conte was already raised 
upon the wheel, when the grand in- 
quisitor ordered them to desist. His 
eyes were, for some minutes, fixed on 
the conte, with an expression of mingled 
pity and anger, when, suddenly turning 
to that officer by whose command the 
torture was ordered to be continued, 
with a look of contempt, he thus ad- 
dressed him — " Were this conduct com- 
patible with mercy, I should have ima- 
F 6 gined 



108 THE ABBESS. 

gined, Girolamo, that you would have 
honoured more your holy function. 
You have evinced towards this offender 
a peculiar degree of inveteracy. You 
know, brother, it is but seldom that I 
am personally present at these scenes ; 
but I came hither, on this occasion, to 
be a witness of the pangs inflicted on 
Marcello Porta; and it seems that 
my presence has been of some effect." 
The inquisitor, then assuming the 
most scornful look, and rising from his 
seat, pronounced these words in an ele- 
vated tone — '' Yet, notwithstanding you 
have, in some measure, swerved from 
your duty, I will not disgrace the mercy 
I profess. Let Marcello Porta be im- 
mediately conducted hence," was the 
command that issued from his lips. 

As he concluded this sentence, he 
quitted the vaulted chamber with a slow 
and dignified step. Girolamo remained, 
for a considerable time, absorbed in the 

most 



THE ABBESS. 109 

most gloomy meditations ; and when he 
arose to quit the chamber, rage, disap- 
pointment, and revenge, were the con- 
flicting passions that boiled within his 
breast. 

A week elapsed, during which period 
the conte was regularly attended by a 
surgeon, in the presence of an inquisitor ; 
for it is one of the laws of this merciful 
office, that if a culprit is unable to re- 
ceive at one time each torture in suc- 
cession, he is restored to health with the 
utmost care, in order that he may the 
sooner be enabled to endure them. The 
fever, at length, abated ; the bodily pain 
decreased ; and the conte was soon ad- 
judged in a state of convalescence. 

About midnight, he was again sum- 
moned from his dungeon, and conducted 
to the vaulted cell ; but no stratagem 
was this night practised to intimidate 
him. He found the same number of 

familiars : 



1 10 THE ABBESS. 

familiars; and the supreme inquisitor, 
accompanied by four others, was seated 
at the table ; one of these was Girolamo. 
There were also two monks, the secre- 
tary, and the inspector. 

As the conte fixed his regard on the 
supreme judge, he could not but ob- 
serve, that gentleness and pity were 
blended in his looks ; and when he 
again exhorted him to repentance, his 
manner was not peremptory, but the 
reproofs were uttered in a voice mild 
and impressive. The conte wavered ; 
a thousand arguments urged him to 
compliance, yet conscience revolted at 
the violation of an oath so sacred. He 
remained for some time in this state of 
torturing incertitude : he was again ur- 
ged — honour at length predominated. — 
" I am fixed," said he, " in my resolve, 
and will remain secret." 

The word was given, and the conte 

was 



THE ABBESS. Ill 

was instantly affixed to the wall, by- 
ropes which bound his legs and arms. 
The familiars were commencino: the 
torture ; but the order of the grand in- 
quisitor stayed their proceeding. — " 'Tis 
my will," said he, " that the punition be 
for some minutes suspended. In the 
mean time, let Maddalena Rosa be con- 
ducted into our presence." 

At that instant a sealed packet was 
presented to the supreme judge, by an 
official, who had just entered the cham- 
ber. Having perused its contents, he 
arose from his seat, and, after a private 
conversation of some minutes with one 
of the inquisitors, he pronounced aloud 
— " To you, brother Nicolo, I depute 
the management of this affair, till my 
return ; but I charge you, let no voice 
compel you to swerve from the plan 
which I have communicated." 

On uttering these words, his eyes 
were bent, with an expression of anger, 

on 



112 THE ABBESS. 

on the countenance of Girolamo. He 
then quitted the vault, whilst two offi- 
cials proceeded to Maddalena's dungeon. 

Since the third examination, she was 
twice visited by the mysterious stranger, 
who had so much interested her by his 
-conversations, that she had acquired ad- 
ditional fortitude, and her mind seemed 
now inspired with an heroic courage, 
almost supernatural. 

It was past midnight, when the offi- 
cials entered her cell. They found her 
wrapped in the most pleasing slumber, 
for she enjoyed, upon her lowly rushes, 
dreams that rarely visit the bed of down. 
She rose with composure, and followed 
the familiars with a firm step. She was 
led through the same dark avenues 
which the conte had traversed ; her ears 
were also assailed by dreadful shrieks — 
she felt the rising emotions of her bo- 
som, 



THE ABBESS. US 

som, and the tear stole adown her 
cheek. 

Her conductors arrived at the vaulted 
cell, the door of which was thrown 
open, when the first object which pre- 
sented itself was the conte Marcello, 
placed in the position to receive the 
torture. A painful sensation seized her 
frame ; she leaned for support against 
the door, and was, for some time, over- 
come with mingled sensations of horror 
and surprise. Maddalena could not 
bear the sight, but averted her eyes to- 
wards the ground. 

The conte, at her first entrance, had 
forgotten the ropes that bound him to 
the dungeon-wall, and made a violent 
effort to spring forwards, when the 
check which he received reminded him 
of his real situation. An agonized groan 
escaped him — he forcibly closed his 
hands, and bit his nether lip with rage 

and 



114 THE ABBESS. 

and disappointment ; then fixing his ar- 
dent gaze on Maddalena, uttered her 
name in convulsed accents. 

" Your silence is required, Marcello 
Porta," said Nicolo, addressing him. 
Then, raising his voice, he ordered 
Maddalena to approach the table. Her 
steps faltered, and it was with difficulty 
she supported herself, and then stopped 
before the inquisitors. At her right 
hand stood the torturers, on the left 
were two Dominican friars, and directly 
opposite, was the suspended conte Mar- 
cello. 

Maddalena observed the numerous 
instruments scattered upon the pave- 
ment. She withdrew her eyes from 
these objects, inspiring sensations of dis- 
gust, which were but augmented, as 
she fixed them on the horrible coun- 
tenance of Girolamo. His large eyes 
glared fiercely upon her; his gloomy 

visage 



THE ABBESS. 115 

visage was strongly marked with those 
violent emotions that pervaded his bo- 
som. Now the quick blood visiting his 
cheeks, gave them a reddened glow : it 
was but momentary ; for the natural 
lividness of his complexion succeeding, 
made him appear more disgusting. 

" Gracious Heaven !" inwardly ex- 
claimed Maddalena, " what must be the 
workings of that man's mind ! — what a 
soul must inhabit his repulsive frame!" 

Nicolo now addressed her as follows: 
— " Your crime, Maddalena, is, if possi- 
ble, more heinous than that of Marcello 
Porta ; for he would never have trans- 
gressed, if you had not interested the 
portress in your behalf; notwithstand- 
ing we proffer mercy, on condition that 
you will divulge all you know of the 
vow by which JNIarcello Porta pretends 
to be bound, or prove that it is merely 
a fabrication to deceive us, and, if pos- 
sible, 



116 THE ABBESS. 

sible, screen himself from the rigorous 
punishment he so justly merits." 

Maddalena, with composure, and in a 
firm tone, replied — *' I am convinced, 
most holy lords, that Marcello Porta is 
involved in some oath of secresy ; but 
every circumstance relating to the pur- 
port thereof, I protest myself totally un- 
acquainted with." 

" How then did you attain a know- 
ledge of that circumstance?" returned 
Girolamo. 

" That question," said Maddalena, 
" was explained during my first exami- 
nation. 'Twas the conte himself who 
related the affair, when at the castello di 
Valdarno." 

" And on what account was any men- 
tion made of this pretended vow?" de- 
manded Nicolo. 

"It was for that purpose alone Mar- 
cello Porta sought me at the castello. 
From the duca, my father, he had learn- 
ed that I was removed from the convent 

of 



THE ABBESS. 117 

of Santa Maria. In vain he protested 
HDy innocence; for the proofs against 
me are apparently so strong, that he cre- 
dited not his asseverations. The conte 
then determined to trace, if possible, the 
route I had taken, and convince me, at 
least, that his visit to the monastery did 
not appertain to myself. I lent an at- 
tentive ear to his narrative, and, con- 
scious of my own integrity, naturally at- 
tributed his mysterious conduct to the 
oath in which he is involved, and yield- 
ed implicit confidence to his word." 

" You persist then," said the inqui- 
sitor, " in asserting your belief, that a 
secret does exist, the purport of which 
you are a stranger to, and in denying 
the whole charge produced against you." 

*' Can I, my lords, divulge the conte's 
vow, or confess myself accessary to his 
admission, not being culpable? Is it 
consistent with reason that I should 
stain my reputation, by tacitly acknow- 
ledging myself an accessary in a fabri- 
cated 



118 THE ABBESS. 

cated crime? or, can I, if tortures are 
inflicted, confess a secret, vested only in 
another's breast ?" 

" How are we to credit these asser- 
tions ?" answered the inquisitor. " Must 
we place implicit confidence in your 
word ?" 

" Or think you," exclaimed Girolamo, 
in a threatening voice, " to be thus re- 
leased from the inquisitorial power ?" 

Maddalena, in an elevated tone, re- 
plied — " No, my lord ; while some have 
authority here, I shall, doubtless, never 
escape. I do not expect that my ver- 
bal assertion should be credited ; no — 
before the Omnipotent I protest the pu- 
rity of my actions. He, whose avenging 
arm will cut off the base oppressors of 
unprotected innocence, before His mercy 
seat I lay my cause, and will, unceas- 
ingly, allege the falsity of the charge 
wherewith I stand accused." 

Maddalena's radiant eyes seemed in- 
spired 



THE ABBESS. 119 

spired with an angelic fire. She bent 
them on Girolamo's countenance. He 
strove, but could not resist their virtue- 
jdarting influence. He knit his brows ; 
his quivering lips, partly open, disco- 
vered his gnashing teeth ; he shrunk 
confounded before truth's piercing ray ; 
and raising his hand, hastily covered his 
diabolical countenance, to conceal his 
dreadful agitation. 

" Your oaths and protestations," said 
Nicolo, " but render you more culpable 
in our eyes, being in possession of such 
indubitable proofs of your guilt. We 
shall, however, soon learn, whether or 
not you practically possess the heroic 
virtue, which, in theory, you so well 
know how to assume. Your heart, we 
know, is strongly attached to the person 
of Marcello Porta : you will not, doubt- 
less, then, behold unmoved, the tor- 
tures which, even now, his body must 
endure, nor cease to be inflicted, till you 

break 



lilO THE ABBESS. 

break your sullen silence. Officials," 
continued the inquisitor, " proceed to 
your duty." 

The familiars had already grasped the 
instruments of torture, and approached 
the conte, to inflict the punishment. 

" Hold !" cried Maddalena : " for the 
love of mercy, restrain awhile your 
hands ! Gracious Heaven ! what must 
be done ?" 

She fell upon her knees in a dreadful 
agony. The conte struggled and groaned 
aloud ; it was not with corporal, but 
mental anguish, at beholding her mad- 
dening situation ; for Nicolo, expecting 
some confession from Maddalena, had 
motioned them to desist. — " Speak," 
said he, addressing her. " Your confes- 
sion will conduce to the salvation of 
both." 

" Mercy, mercy, dread lord !" exclaim- 
ed 



THE ABBESS. 121 

ed the conte ; " she cannot answer ; 
Maddalena has nothing to confess." 

She arose : frenzy was in her look : 
she elevated her clasped hands to heaven, 
and cried, in a convulsed tone — " Now, 
arise, thou Omnipotent Deity, and 
judge thy cause! Confess T continued 
she, advancing to the table; " what 
must I confess?" 

She placed her hand on the missal, 
which lay before her. Maddalena's eyes 
were rivetted on Nicolo's countenance, 
who filled the seat of the grand inqui- 
sitor. 

" I will avow my innocence; and 
may the Power I serve, judge thine 
offences, according as the voice of truth 
shall now influence thy conduct !" 

There was an inexpressible something 
in her manner, that confounded every 
one present. All were astonished, and 

VOL. III. G inwardly 



lM3i THE ABBESS^. 

inwardly confessed, that truth alone 
could so forcibly operate on their minds. 
The inquisitor, to whom these words 
were addressed, was particularly struck 
with their energetic force. Girolamo 
also felt the workings of his unquiet 
conscience, and strove to crush its per- 
vading influence, by mentally cursing 
the object that had roused it. 

During some moments, a gloomy 
pause ensued. Nicolo, at length, broke 
the silence — ** I will," said he, " pursue 
a different plan of operation, which will 
assuredly prove more effectual. You, 
Maddalena Rosa, shall undergo the tor- 
ture : your agonizing shrieks shall pierce 
Marcello's hardened bosom, and force 
the secret from his lips." 

The command was immediately is- 
sued — the familiars quitted the conte, 
and seized the delicate form of the sta- 
tue-struck Maddalena — already they 

began 



THE ABBESS. 123 

began to tear the garments from her 
tender limbs — already the barbarians 
had rent the veil, that had concealed 
her milk-white bosom, from which her 
palpitating heart was bursting. The 
big tears trickled down her pallid cheeks, 
like flaky snow, which the sun's heat dis- 
solves upon the marble's cold and polish- 
ed surface — now her long auburn hair 
escaped the fillet, which had negligently 
bound it — one hand was raised to cover 
her naked breast — the other uplifted, 
seemed to supplicate Heaven's protection. 

The conte could no longer behold this 
scene, and exclaimed — " Barbarians ! re- 
frain your unhallowed touch: my own 
sufferings I could have patiently endur- 
ed; but I can no longer remain un- 
moved — no; / will annul my oath — 
/ will make a full confession, so you 
but spare that innocent victim." 

*' Hold, Marcello," cried Maddalena, 

roused from her lethargic state, " will 

G 2 you 



124 THE ABBESS. 

you merit my eternal hatred? will 
you forfeit the comfort of dying with 
me, and quitting these scenes of wretch- 
edness with her you love? — will you 
become a dishonour to society, the scoff 
of those whose virtues you should emu- 
late ? — will you forfeit Heaven's mercy, 
rather than submit to a momentary pang 
on earth ? for such is the lot attendant 
on perjury. Think not that my groans 
will assail you : I have practised how to 
live virtuously : I shall not shrink at the 

pangs inflicted on my mortal part 1 

yield myself freely, to preserve your 
honour uncontaminated." 

From the moment that the familiars 
seized Maddalena, Girolamo had expe- 
rienced the most terrible agitation ; but 
fear was the passion that visibly pre- 
dominated over his mind; and on the 
conte's irresolution, his emotions were 
so violent, that he was on the point of 
quitting his seat, had not Maddalena's 

sudden 



THE ABBESS. 125 

sudden retort withheld him. Every 
word she uttered seemed to reassure Gi- 
rolamo, and his features partly regained 
their wonted character. 

" Will you confess, Marcello ?" cried 
the inquisitor. 

The conte was silent. Again the 
question was repeated. 

" Shame! shame!" cried Maddalena; 
'* how I blush at your pusillanimity ! 
Resume your wonted courage ; be the 
man of honour — or live despised by her 
whose life you thus basely seek to pur- 
chase." 

No mind can fancy, how much less 
can language express, the contending 
feelings of the conte's bosom ! honour, 
love, and fear, by turns usurped their 
empire. Before him stood that being, 
who alone could render life supportable, 
G 3 sur- 



126 THE ABBESS; 

surrounded by brutal wretches, prompt 
to inflict any punishment his silence 
would subject her to. His lips could 
free her from their power, and yet the 
purchase of her liberty would bring 
upon himself her everlasting hatred and 
contempt. A third time, Nicolo urged 
the question. 

" And does Marcello Porta, then, 
hesitate ?" exclaimed Maddalena ; " do 
you waver between my love or detesta- 
tion r 

" No," cried the conte ; " I will re- 
main firm : my secret shall die with me." 

They exhorted him, but in vain ; his 
mind had, apparently, regained fresh 
energy. A seraphic smile beamed on 
Maddalena's countenance, and she more 
resembled an aerial spirit, than a perse- 
cuted inhabitant of the Inquisition. 

The conte's silence doomed her to the 

rack. 



THE ABBESS. 127 

rack. The motion was oiven — the of- 
ficials proceeded to their duty. They 
were forcibly tearing off her outward 
garments; the conte found that his late 
courage was but assumed ; he wavered, 
his fortitude again forsook him, and he 
once more entreated to be heard. 

" Are you then determined, and will 
you confess ?" cried Nicolo. 

After some hesitation, the conte re- 
turned — ** 1 will confess the secret." 

A look from Maddalena petrified him, 
and he was on the point of recalling his 
words, when Girolamo, whose pertur- 
bation was before so visible, now per- 
ceiving, by the conte's emotion, his for- 
titude forsaking him, and that a confes- 
sion would, undoubtedly, evscape his lips, 
could no longer contain his violent agi- 
tation. He rose from his seat, and draw- 
ing a poniard from his bosom, rushed 
towards the conte. Maddalena flew 
G 4 from 



128 THE ABBESS. 

from the torturers, and critically seizing 
his arm, the hostile weapon only grazed 
Marcello's vest. The inquisitors had all 
arisen from their seats, and, by Nicolo's 
order, the officials seized Girolamo's per- 
son. At this juncture one of the portals 
of the vault was thrown open, and the 
supreme inquisitor appeared. 



CHAP. 



THE- ABBESS. 129 



CHAP. III. 



Oh, my oftence is rank ! it smells to Heaven : 
It hath the priinal eldest curse upon 't. 



My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent ; 
And, like a man to double business bouiui, 
I stand in pause, where I shall first begin, 
And both neglect. — — 

Oh, wretched state ! oh, bosom black as death ! 

Oh, limed soul ! that, struggling to be free. 

Art more engag'd. Shakspkare. 

Every person was in the utmost con- 
sternation. The grand inquisitor darted 
a furious look on Girolamo, and resumed 
his seat at the table of office, — " Let 
Marcello Porta be released!" were the 
first words that issued from his lips. 

The command was instantly obeyed. 

In a softened voice he then remanded 

G 5 Maddalena 



130 THE ABBESS. 

Maddalena to her dungeon, and the 
conte was likewise conducted to his cell. 



His sensations cannot be easily de- 
scribed ; every circunastance of the late 
scene forcibly recurred to his mind. 
The unmerited insults which Madda- 
lena had experienced wrung his suscep- 
tible heart ; and the dread of what might 
hereafter occur made him tremble with 
apprehension. Now he arose to sum- 
mon one of the inquisitors, that he 
might make a full confession ; now 
Maddalena's threats resounded in his 
ear, and he quickly abandoned the 
thought. He shuddered at the recol- 
lection of the inquisitor's base attempt 
upon his life, and blessed her hand, 
that had so providentially warded the 
blow. 

The conte had been long assured that 
some hidden motive actuated Girolamo's 
conduct ; and of this he was now fully 

convinced. 



THE ABBESS. 131 

convinced. He brought to mind the 
lenity that marked the countenance of 
the supreme inquisitor, on his re-en- 
trance into the vault; and notwithstand- 
ing the dangerous predicament in which 
he was involved, a ray of hope seemed 
to dawTi upon his drooping soul. 

Maddalena's spirits were depressed by 
the late exertions in her dungeon. She 
offered up a prayer to Heaven, and felt 
reanimated. — " Yes, she had frustrated 
the murderous design ; she had saved 
the life of him her soul adored." Even 
the conte's irresolution did not displease 
her; she knew the stability of his mind, 
and became more convinced of the fer- 
vency of his affection, by this attempt 
to rescue her at the expence of his ho- 
nour. 

The grand inquisitor commanded Gi- 

rolamo to approach, and he obeyed in 

sullen silence. His arms were crossed 

G 6 upon 



132 THE ABBESS» 

upon his breast, and his lowering eyes 
were bent to the earth. — " I demand/' 
said the inquisitor, " the motive which 
actuated your conduct, in thus violating 
the vow of mercy, by which you bound 
yourself, on entering upon your sacred 
duty. Why have you interrupted a 
prisoner in his confession, and assumed 
to yourself the office of punition ?" 

After a pause, Girolamo replied — 
" My patience could no longer brook 
the hardened obstinacy, the insolence, 
and contempt, with which this tribunal 
was loaded." 

" And for that reason," returned the 
inquisitor, " you attempted to assassinate 
the object of your disgust ?" 

" I undertook the cause of offended 
Heaven," answered Girolamo. 

" And is it thus you seek to merit its 
protection ? — was there no secret cause 
that instigated the act ?" 

" None," replied he, " save that 
-&gt;^i-; ^'ry which 



THE ABBESS. 133 

which I glory in confessing, the cause of 
vindicating insulted religion." 

The supreme inquisitor frowned ter- 
ribly, and the word " hypocrite" escaped 
his lips. — " We shall inspect farther into 
this affair. In the mean time, let Gi- 
rolamo be conducted hence, and closely 
confined in a dungeon of this prison." 

With his arms still folded, and with- 
out the least change of countenance, he 
quitted the chamber, accompanied by 
the familiars. 

Two days elapsed from this period. 
On the morning of the third, the conte 
Marcello and Maddalena Rosa were 
summoned before the table of the Holy 
Office, where they beheld, to their mu- 
tual astonishment, the madre Bracciano, 
the monk Ubaldo, and Ursula, the por- 
tress of Santa Maria. All the inquisi- 
tors, except Girolamo, were assembled ; 
the supreme judge was arrayed in the 

superb 



134 THE ABBESS. 

superb habit of his office; and every 
thing wore an appearance of the most 
awful solemnity. 

The conte with difficulty suppressed 
his agitation, on beholding the authors 
of his own and his Rosa's misery. Mad- 
dalena likewise regarded the madre and 
Ubaldo with a sensation of horror. The 
abbess maintained her haughty dignity ; 
she scarcely deigned to look upon the 
victims of her rage ; nor did she appear 
the least awed at the dreadful tribunal, 
before which she stood. Her piercing 
eye was fixed upon the seat of the su- 
preme judge, and a well-assumed air of 
conscious innocence marked her whole 
deportment. 

The monk Ubaldo, who stood at her 
side, played his part with equal cun- 
ning. He fixed his regard on the conte, 
at his first entrance : not the smallest 
change was perceivable — every feature 

retained 



THE ABBESS. 135 

retained its wonted character. His gaze 
was at length turned on Maddalena. 
Not even the radiant truth, beaming 
from her countenance, could in the least 
discompose the well-arranged symmetry 
of his features. 

After a solemn pause of considerable 
length, the grand inquisitor began as 
follows : — " Most holy brothers, the 
cause now before us is involved in a pe- 
culiar air of mystery. 1 have therefore 
summoned the accusers before us, that 
we may be the better enabled to decide 
on the merits or demerits of the accu- 
sed. I have diligently examined the 
several parties ; their evidence has been 
uniform, and time, place, nay, every cir- 
cumstance has coincided. Yet if the 
mysterious secret by which Marcello 
Porta pretends to be bound, does really 
exist, the accusation against the priso- 
ners is most base, and merits exemplary 
punition." 

His 



136 THE ABBESS. 

His eyes were bent on the mad re's 
features ; they underwent not the least 
change ; and Maddalena, who turned a 
scrutinizing glance on Ubaldo, could 
not discern a varying muscle. 

The inquisitor then addressed the 
conte : — " Have you, Marcello Porta, 
any knowledge of the person before 
you ?" 

" I know him," returned the conte, 
" to be a monk of the convent of Santa 
Croce — his name is Ubaldo." 

" Do you also know that female?" 
continued he, pointing to the lady ab- 
bess. 

" She is the madre Vittoria Braccia- 
no, superior of the sisterhood of Santa 
Maria," replied the conte. 

" And who is the third person ?" 

" I am a total stranger to her features," 
continued Marcello; " nor do I recollect 
having ever before seen her." 

" Are you alike unacquainted with 

her?" 



THE ABBESS. 137 

her ?" said the inquisitor, addressing 
himself to Maddalena. 

" No, my lord : her name is Ursula — 
she is portress of the convent of Santa 
Maria." 

The conte was ordered to approach 
the table. A missal was presented to 
him, and an oath administered, the pur- 
port of which was to confirm his last 
assertion respecting Ursula, who was 
also commanded to swear, that all her 
depositions respecting the bribes she had 
received from Maddalena, and her hav- 
ing admitted the conte into the convent, 
were true ; that she had also fled the 
monastery on learning the madre's dis- 
covery of the fact; but, touched with 
contrition for her fault, she had returned, 
and penitently confessed her crime, en- 
treating mercy at the madre's hands. 

Ursula, without hesitation, took the 
oath. 

The 



138 THE ABBESS. 

The conte stood petrified at hearing 
such premeditated perjury ; and Madda- 
lena experienced similar sensations. 

The madre was next called upon. 

" When did you, Vittoria Bracciano, 
first behold the person of Marcello 
Porta?" 

She replied in a firm tone — " The 
night when I discovered him in Mad- 
dalena Rosa's company. I never before, 
nor since that period, recollect having 
seen his person." 

The conte was astonished at the plau- 
sible manner with w^hich she asserted 
this falsity, and, with difficulty, restrain- 
ed his expression of surprise, when the 
oath was administered. 

" Now, padre," continued the judge, 
" where, and at what period, did you 
gain a knowledge of Marcello Porta ?" 

" I recol- 



THE ABBESS. 139 

" I recollect seeing him," replied the 
monk, " in the great church of the con- 
vent of Santa Maria, on the morning 
of the Annunciation. He £s also pre- 
sent there at evening vespers. From 
that day, I never beheld his person, till 
the time I discovered him in company 
with Maddalena Rosa." 

Ubaldo took the missal, and swore to 
these depositions. 

" What have you, Marcello Porta, 
to alleo'e acrainst the affirmations of the 
accusers?" said the inquisitor. 

" I confess that I was discovered by 
the madre and Ubaldo, as before related ; 
but 1 again deny, that my intention, 
in visiting the convent, was to meet, 
and forcibly convey Maddalena Rosa 
from thence. I well remember seeing 
the padre, as by him stated; but the 
evidence of Ursula the portress is most 
false — I never, before this hour, beheld 

her; 



140 THE ABBESS. 

her ; nor was it through her means that 
I obtained the allesred adn:iission." 



Every eye was directed to the coun- 
tenance of Ursula; but she had been 
too well tutored to betray any evident 
marks of guilt. Maddalena was then 
questioned. She related every thing, as 
before stated, and, lastly, contradicted, in 
the most positive terms, the whole of 
Ursula's evidence. 

The supreme inquisitor then spoke 
as follows — " You see, brothers, that 
the evidences precisely correspond with 
those which each individual has before 
affirmed. The attestations of the ac- 
cused differ widely from those of the 
accusers. The abbess and Ubaldo both 
assert, that the meeting was premedi- 
tated, and that Marcello's intent was to 
carry off the boarder ; but the most ma- 
terial evidence is that of Ursula, who 
positively swears, that she was bribed by 

Maddalena 



THE ABBESS. 141 

Maddalena to admit the conte; which 
assertions the prisoners contradict on 
oath. One party must therefore be 
guilty of the basest perjury. I am not 
willing to suspect the madre of the im- 
maculate sisterhood of Santa Maria ; nor 
can I doubt the upright character of 
the monk Ubaldo. Besides, what end 
could they have to answer, in seeking 
the lives of two innocents ? I minutely 
examined the features of Maddalena and 
Marcello Porta ; an air of truth seemed 
to accompany their words ; nor did Ur- 
sula betray any symptoms of guilt. 
How can we reconcile such contradic- 
tions ? If Ursula did not admit Mar- 
cello Porta, as he affirms, I demand of 
him, who was his conductor ? and, if he 
went not to the convent with the alleged 
intent, what was the purport of his er- 
rand? I am then answered, that a 
most solemn oath binds him to secrecy ; 
neither do I myself doubt the veracity 
of the assertion." 

The 



142 THE ABBESS. 

The inquisitor bent a scrutinizing 
glance on the abbess and the monk ; but 
they maintained the same undaunted 
deportment. Turning to the portress, 
he addressed her as follows : — " Mercy 
is Heaven's greatest attribute; it is the 
predominant feature of this tribunal, 
and the duty of its ministers prompts 
them to adhere to its dictates. If, there- 
fore, Ursula, you have sworn falsely, I 
entreat that you avow your crime; for, 
should you prove guilty, it is the only 
method you can adopt to merit our for- 
giveness. Think not to conceal the 
crime; for though guilt may flourish for 
a season, the time will come, when you 
must confess the power of truth, and 
meet the punishment you so justly me- 
rit. Before you, Ursula, stand two per- 
sons, accused of flagrant crimes ; if 
guilty, your evidence justly dooms them 
to their fate; but, on the other hand, 
think what awaits you, should any un- 
toward circumstance bring your infamy 

to 



THE ABBESS, 143 

to light. The rack will first draw forth 
a confession, and the flames afterwards 
consume you, for the very crimes you 
have divulged; or, think, should you 
even live undiscovered, what will be 
the workings of your conscience — what 
the agonies of your dying hour, and the 
torments of eternity ! Weigh well these 
circumstances in your mind. Remem- 
ber, that in three days, will be celebrated 
an act of faith. Imagine that you hear 
Maddalena's and the conte's shrieks, as 
the ardent flame consumes their mortal 
flesh, and that their fleeting souls ascend 
before the Throne of Mercy, heaping 
on your detested head the crime of mur- 
der, calling aloud for Heaven's ven- 
geance." 

During this address, the eyes of the 
madre and the monk were ri vetted on 
her face; nor could they altogether con- 
ceal their inward emotions. Ursula's 
countenance underwent several changes, 

and 



144 THE ABBESS. 

and a pause of some length ensued ere 
she replied, during which, she banished 
the unpleasant thoughts that had rankled 
in her bosom, and firmly protested, that 
she appeared in the cause of truth, and 
had acted with integrity. Maddalena 
turned her eyes towards the portress — it 
was but a momentary glance — her soul 
sickened at beholding an object so depra- 
ved. The conte's regard was fixed on 
his Rosa — he read the workings of her 
bosom — they coincided with those of 
his own breast. 

A silence ensued ; during which the 
grand inquisitor frowned angrily, re- 
garding, by turns, the abbess, the monk, 
and Ursula. Then turning to the con- 
te, he thus addressed him — " If your 
oath, Marcello Porta, precludes you 
from divulging the manner of your en- 
trance into the convent, is there no se- 
cond person acquainted with the circum- 
stance, 



THE ABBESS. 145 

stance, who might throw some light 
upon the affair ?" 

" Those," replied the conte, " who 
involved me in the dreadful secret, can 
alone prove my innocence; and their 
evidence I never can expect to obtain." 

" In your visit to the convent, were 
you ever attacked, and your life endan- 
gered?" said the inquisitor. 

The conte was astonished at this 
question, and the madre and Ubaldo 
betrayed the strongest emotions. 

" Yes, my lord," returned the conte, 
" I was assailed by three strangers : two 
of them fell in the contest, the third 
sought refuge in flight." He then pro- 
duced the diamond cross, and presented 
it to the inquisitor. " This," continued 
he, "attracted my notice; it undoubted- 
ly belonged to one of the bravoes. I 
have, since that period, preserved it 
with care, in the hope that it might, 

VOL. III. H one 



146 THE ABBESS. 

one day, lead to a developement of the 
mystery." 

The supreme judge examined the 
crucifix in silence, for a considerable time. 

" You can adduce no witness then, 
Marcello Porta?" 

The conte answered in the negative. 

" I then command that the evi- 
dence for the prisoners appear." 

On uttering these words, he struck 
the table with violence — the chamber 
resounded with a hollow noise. Mad- 
dalena and the conte looked anxiously 
towards the entrance of the apartment, 
while a ray of hope mutually animated 
their bosoms. 

Notwithstanding the madre's exer- 
tions to resist the strong impulse of fear, 

she 



THE ABBESS. 147 

she visibly yielded to its influence. 
The colour faded from her cheeks, and 
her eyes lost their boldness of expres- 
sion. Ubaldo no longer fixed his con- 
fident regard on the inquisitor : liis head 
sunk upon his guilty bosom. The vile 
Ursula trembled with apprehension, and 
with difficulty supported herself under 
this sudden shock. 

The inquisitors were themselves asto- 
nished, and every eye was bent upon 
the door. It was at length thrown 
open ; when a man entered, rather 
above the middle stature, habited in 
black. Both the accusers and the ac- 
cused were astonished at beholding him, 
his person being unknown to either par- 
ty. Having made a profound reverence, 
he approached the table of office. 

" Who are you, and what have you 
to allege in behalf of the prisoners?" 
said the supreme inquisitor. 

H 2 "My 



148 THE ABBESS. 

" My name is Pietro Granelli. I 
was born at Rome, but my life hath 
been mostly spent in this city. I come 
to disprove the charge of guilt brought 
against the prisoners. I will prove that 
the madre Vittoria knew the conte be- 
fore she discovered him with Maddalena 
Rosa; that padre Ubaldo is unworthy 
the garment he wears ; that Ursula is 
perjured, and not suborned by the pri-^ 
soners, but by their base accusers. The 
duties of the monastery of Santa Croce 
are peculiarly rigid; I, therefore, de- 
mand of the monk, why he was absent 
from his convent, at the extraordinary 
hour, when he asserts his having dis- 
covered Maddalena and the conte in con- 
versation. The rules of his order are, 
that, after the vesper-bell, he shall not 
be seen without the walls, unless some 
dying person requires the attendance of 
one of the fraternity. He cannot al- 
lege, as an excuse, that any nun of San- 
ta Maria needed his presence : the sister- 
hood 



THE ABBESS. 149 

hood were all in perfect health : let him, 
then, answer my interrogatory." 

Padre Nicolo was on the point of 
questioning the stranger, but the grand 
inquisitor motioned him to desist. Gra- 
nelli was silent : every eye was turned 
from him, upon the features of the pa- 
dre Ubaldo, who stook petrified and 
speechless with astonishment. 

" What!" resumed Pietro, " can he 
not reply to this question? What will 
he say, when I tax him with having 
thrice absented himself from Santa Croce 
at that hour? when 1 also accuse him 
of administering the oath of secrecy to 
the conte, and admitting him by a pri- 
vate door into the cloisters of Santa Ma- 
ria ?" 

" I will deny both these charges," an- 
swered Ubaldo, roused from his lethargy. 

The stranger, smihng contemptuously 

upon him, continued — ** 'Twere better, 

H 3 padre, 



150 THE ABBESS. 

padre, that you make a full confession, 
and evince, at least, some signs of re- 
pentance." 

Then turning to the abbess, whose 
countenance betrayed the strongest 
marks of horror and disappointed pride, 
he addressed her as follows — " Do you 
not remember fixing your regard upon 
the conte, during the morning service 
of the Annunciation ? do you not recol- 
lect the emotions which his presence 
created in your bosom ? did you not 
depute the monk Ubaldo to administer 
the oath of secrecy, in the private cha- 
pel dedicated to Our Lady, and then ad- 
mit him to your presence?" 

The madre, assuming all the firmness 
she was able, strenuously denied every 
circumstance. " But," continued she, 
concealing her emotions beneath a feign- 
ed smile of contempt, " if the charge 
were even true, how could you acquire 
a knowledge of the fact ?" 

The stranger shook his head, and re- 
plied 



THE ABBESS. 151 

plied — " With me it rests to prove your 
guilt, and free oppressed innocence: if, 
therefore, I make good my assertions, 
it is of little consequence how I attain- 
ed a confirmation of the fact. If I fail 
in my proofs, I expect no mercy : this 
tribunal will not suffer me to escape un- 
punished. You, Ursula," continued he, 
" were you not tempted to appear 
against the accused, through the insti- 
gations of your superior and the monk 
Ubaldo ?" 

The portress, who had but a short 
time before so strenuously attested their 
guilt, now wavered in her resolution; 
but shame at length prevented her from 
acknowledging the crime ; and she still 
persisted in asserting her innocence. 

The stranger then drew from his bo- 
som a paper, which he presented to the 
grand inquisitor, who, having perused 
it, held conversation with padre Nicolo 
H 4 for 



152 THE ABBESS. 

for some minutes. Then regarding the 
abbess and her abettors, with a penetra- 
ting look, he demanded if they could 
controvert the accusations brought 
against them. They replied with firm- 
ness, that the whole was a base fabrica- 
tion ; and the madre, in particular, as- 
suming the most haughty tone, alleg- 
ed, that her character and situation 
should preclude her from being subject- 
ed to the supposition of having been 
guilty of an act of such atrocity. 

" True, madre," returned the inqui- 
sitor, " you should have been exempt 
from these accusations ; but the proofs 
are too strong against you, to escape in- 
vestigation." 

Here he paused, in expectation of a 
reply ; but she maintained a sullen si- 
lence. 

" 'Twere better," resumed he, " that 

you 



THE ABBESS. 153 

you confess and confide in our mercy. 
To ameliorate your punishment, we ac- 
cord you one night for reflection ; but, 
if to-morrow, you do not give satisfac- 
tory proofs, that your accusations are 
true we shall deem ourselves justified in 
pursuing the most rigorous measures." 

They were forthwith ordered to sepa- 
rate dungeons. Maddalena and the 
conte were also led back to their respec- 
tive cells. 

What varied sensations pervaded 
their breasts ! the conte, from the beha- 
viour of the grand inquisitor, felt assur- 
ed that he was in possession of some 
part, if not the whole of the secret. 
He pictured to his imagination the pe- 
riod when he should be released from 
his dismal abode, and enjoy, with Mad- 
dalena, a state of the purest happiness. 
He anticipated the joy he should expe- 
H 5 rience 



154 THE ABBESS. 

rience on being reconciled to the duca 
Bertocci's good opinion. 

From Pietro's evidence, Maddalena 
had in part conjectured the cause of 
the madre's revengeful conduct, though 
she did not suspect that the conte had 
yielded to her guilty passion. She now 
adored, more than ever, the retributive 
hand of justice, and, recalling Marietta's 
dying words, she exclaimed — " There is 
indeed but one Omnipotent, in whom all 
power is vested. I have trusted in His 
mercy ; He has not abandoned me." 

The madre Vittoria surveyed the 
dungeon, of which she was now become 
an inhabitant, with a look of gloomy 
horror, and her breast was agitated with 
sensations the most dreadful. She knew 
the rigour of this tribunal ; she was also 
acquainted with its duplicity, and, there- 
fore, doubted whether the evidence of 
the stranger might not be an artifice of 

the 



THE ABBESS. IW 

the Holy Office to fathom the truth. 
Yet, the recollection of the coincidence 
of Pietro's depositions with the real facts, 
made her tremble lest the inquisitors had 
obtained proofs of the depravity of her 
proceedings. Nevertheless, her pride 
revolted at the idea of a confession, and 
she resolutely determined to combat 
every danger. Thus resolved, she sul- 
lenly awaited the mandate of the lords 
inquisitors. 

The padre Ubaldo, after various con- 
flicts, had formed a similar resolution ; 
and Ursula, already assured that a con- 
fession would avail her nothing, resolved 
to maintain an obstinate silence. 

The ensuing morning they were each 
summoned to the chamber of office, 
where the accusers were again separately 
exhorted to confess; but the grand in- 
quisitor, finding that they still persisted 
in protesting their innocence, drew forth 
H 6 the 



156 THE ABBESS. 

the same paper which Pietro had de- 
livered the preceding day, and read, in 
a loud voice, a circunmstantial detail of 
every particular respecting the madre 
Vittoria, the conte, and the monk Ubal- 
do, which concluded in the following 
words : — 

" And I do hereby swear, in the pre- 
" sence of my confessor, padre Ignazio, 
" of the convent of Santa Croce, and the 
" abbate Pietro Alvaro, superior of the 
" said monastery, that my confession is 
" founded in truth ; that I was myself 
'* a witness to the facts herein contained, 
" and sworn to secrecy ; but, touched by 
" the pious exhortations of my ghostly 
" father, I determined to ease my mind 
" of this weight of guilt that oppressed 
" me, and, by saving two innocents, en- 
" deavour to make my peace with that 
" Omnipotent Power, I have so heinously 
" offended. (Signed) Beatrice, 

" Sister of the Convent of Santa Maria.''' 

The 



THE ABBESS. 157 

The madre, the monk, and Ursula, 
were ready to sink with shame, on hear- 
ing this unexpected declaration of their 
conspiracy. Maddalena was overwhelm- 
ed with astonishment, and the conte 
bent his eyes to the ground. 

The grand inquisitor, in a voice that 
showed his dreadful displeasure, de- 
manded if they had any thing to allege 
in extenuation of their guilt, when they 
still persisted that the whole was a fa- 
brication. He hastily rose from his 
seat, and summoning the familiars in a 
furious tone, ordered them to be con- 
ducted to the rack. They were led from 
the chamber, accompanied by one of 
the inquisitors and a secretary. 

During their absence, Maddalena and 
the conte were desired to be seated on a 
selette placed for their accommodation. 
Marcello brought to recollection the 
pangs which he had experienced from 

one 



1^8 THE ABBESS. 

one torture only, and sickened at the 
sufferings which were then inflicting on 
his enemies; pity predominated over 
every other sensation. He arose, and 
petitioned the inquisitor to mitigate the 
rigour of their punishments; but the 
supreme judge soon checked his zeal. 
Having ordered him to remain silent, 
and resume his seat, he addressed him 
in these word : — " Although, Marcello 
Porta, the nun's confession has interes- 
ted us in your favour, yet we cannot 
decide upon the cause, till we have ex- 
torted from one of your accusers a si- 
milar proof of your innocence. You 
have yourself been a witness, that no 
persuasive arguments were effectual ; 
necessity has therefore obliged us to 
adopt this step." 

The conte felt the full force of the 
inquisitor's words ; and finding that his 
own and Maddalena's liberty could not 

otherwise 



THE ABBESS. 159 

otherwise be obtained, bowed his head 
in silence to the grand inquisitor. 

As he raised his eyes, they caught 
those of Maddalena, which had been 
fixed on his countenance since the read- 
ing of sister Beatrice's confession. He 
could not withstand her penetrating 
glance; his reprehensible conduct struck 
more forcibly than ever on his mind, 
and he underwent the most heart-pierc- 
ing sensations. 

During this period, the monk Ubaldo 
first underwent the infliction of torture. 
He confided in the madre's firm resolu- 
tion, and suffered every pang, without 
revealing a circumstance which might 
tend to their crimination. 

The portress was the next to suffer ; 
she submitted, for some time, with for- 
titude; but on the question's being 
proposed a second time, she attempted 

to 



160 THE ABBESS. 

to speak, when her agonies were so in- 
sufferable, owing to the familiars hav- 
ing executed their office with such pe- 
culiar rigour, that the surgeon interfered, 
and she was conveyed senseless from the 
dungeon. 

The madre Vittoria was lastly put to 
the question, as the inquisitors, consi- 
dering her elevated station, had post- 
poned her punishment, in the hope that 
a confession would have been extorted 
from the monk or Ursula. After the 
infliction of the first and second torture, 
her pride, every consideration yielded to 
the corporeal anguish she endured, and 
Vittoria, in a convulsed tone, requested 
to be heard. The inquisitdr stayed the 
familiars ; but it was not until the ques- 
tion had been several times repeated, 
and the torturers were again ordered to 
do their duty, that she could be pre- 
vailed upon to divulge the truth. 

Her 



THE ABBESS. l6l 

Her guilt being ascertained, she was 
supported back to the chamber of office, 
whither the monk Ubaldo had been 
previously conducted. The j udge being 
acquainted with her confession, a pause 
of some moments succeeded, during 
which, the monk was most terribly agi- 
tated. Sometimes he darted the most 
threatening looks at the madre; now 
the keen anguish of his lacerated limbs 
caused a chilling moisture, that bedew- 
ed his frame; his dark soul execrated 
her pusillanimity, and vented the bit- 
terest curses upon the innocents that 
would thus escape the deep-laid scheme, 
planned for their ruin. 

The inquisitor, having expatiated on 
the heinousness of the crime, pronoun- 
ced the following sentences — ** You, 
madre Vittoria Bracciano, have been 
guilty of a crime, which merits death ; 
but your confession has evinced some 
signs of repentance : we therefore doom 

you 



162 THE ABBESS. 

you to the following punishment : — You 
shall be deprived of your dignity, be- 
fore all the sisterhood of Santa Maria, 
and in their presence, make a full decla- 
ration of your guilt. You must then 
travel barefoot to the convent of peni- 
tents at Rome, where we shall previous- 
ly give orders for your reception. 
There, on the first Friday in every 
month, you shall be whipped on your 
bare shoulders, by one of the lay-sisters, 
bearing a rod of thorns. You shall not 
be permitted to take refreshment at the 
table with the rest of the nuns, but 
publicly eat off the pavement; and 
you shall for ever be subject to the most 
menial offices of the lay-sisters. We 
farther order, that you never more cover 
yourself with the sacred veil; and that 
you abstain, during three days in every 
week, from all kind of animal food, 
partaking only of bread and water ; and 
lastly, during the mid-day repast, you 
shall, bareheaded, and on your knees, 

in 



THE ABBESS. 163 

in presence of all the community, pro- 
nounce aloud the guilty deed for which 
you were thus degraded. 

" You, padre Ubaldo, of the convent 
of Santa Croce, having, with obduracy, 
persisted in concealing your villainy, 
and scorned that mercy which you 
might have otherwise obtained, shall 
be first stripped of the sacred vestments 
of your order, and in three days, attend 
at the solemnization of the act of faith : 
we shall there deliver you over to the 
secular arm, which will, doubtless, con- 
demn you to the flames, that your guil- 
ty soul may be everlastingly tortured 
for the crimes you have endeavoured to 
perpetrate. 

" We condemn Ursula, should she 
survive the torture which has been in- 
flicted, to a similar fate. 

" And, whereas Marcello Porta stands 
accused with sacrilegiously entering the 
convent of Santa Maria, intending to 
carry off* a boarder from that commu- 
nity, 



164 THE ABBESS. 

nity, we have, as our holy office re- 
quires, charitably examined the charge, 
and find the second part disproved : but 
the first being established, though with 
some alleviating circumstances in Mar- 
cello's favour, we, considering his im- 
prisonment, and the punition already in- 
flicted, do sentence him to be brought 
privately, for the avoiding scandal to 
the holy sisterhood, and demand pardon 
and absolution from the Holy Office for 
his past offence ; he, the said Marcello, 
also paying one thousand crowns, as a 
charitable donation for the redemption 
of captives; and causing thirty masses 
to be said in the private chapel of Our 
Lady, having first presented its holy 
patroness some costly relic, in token of 
his gratitude, as, through her mediation, 
his innocence has been established. And 
as it has been clearly proved that you, 
Maddalena Rosa, are in no way impli- 
cated in the charge brought against you, 
we honourably acquit you of the same, 

your 



THE ABBESS. 165 

your accusers being hereby declared in- 
famous, and their crimes cognizable by 
this Holy Office ; and we hereby order 
that you be freed from farther imprison- 
ment, and that you be delivered, with- 
out delay, to the duca, your noble father." 

At the conclusion of this sentence, 
the inquisitor ordered the madre and 
the monk Ubaldo to separate dungeons ; 
and a messenger was instantly dispatch- 
ed to the Bertocci palace, to acquaint 
the duca with the welcome news, and 
prepare him to receive his beloved 
daughter. 

In the course of a few hours, after 
having received the torture, the wretch- 
ed Ursula made a confession of her 
guilt, and expired, being thereby saved 
from the dreadful end to which she was 
doomed by the inquisitorial office. 

The pangs of death would liave been 

bliss, 



166 THE ABBESS. 

bliss, compared to those torments which 
the madre endured. Sometimes she 
cursed herself for having yielded to the 
agonies of the moment, and divulged 
her crime. Now she painted the de- 
grading punition which she was doomed 
to suffer. Her soul revolted at the idea, 
and a momentary thought of self-destruc- 
tion flashed across her maddened brain ; 
but the vengeance of offended Heaven 
suddenly checked her guilty purpose. 
Even the proud abbess of Santa Maria 
shrunk from the idea of an avenging 
Deity. — " No," she cried ; " I may, by 
this debasement and after- repentance, 
merit forgiveness. What would be my 
lot, if, loaded with my present crime, I 
were to perpetrate the dreadful sin of 
self-murder, and rush, unprepared, into 
the presence of my heavenly Judge ?" 

In the evening she was conducted to 
the convent of Santa Maria, where the 
first part of her sentence was put into 

execution ; 



THE ABBESS. l67 

execution ; and that night, acconnpanied 
by officers of the Inquisition, she com- 
nienced her painful pilgrimage to the 
convent of Penitencia at Rome. 

The monk Ubaldo at first gloried in 
the fortitude he had evinced, under the 
tortures that had been inflicted. He 
despised the conduct of the madre Vit- 
toria, and deemed the inherent perverse- 
ness of his disposition a virtue ; but when 
left to his private meditations, experi- 
enced all the horrors of his situation. 
The dreadful death to which he was 
doomed, terrified his guilty conscience ; 
the scenes of his past life recurred to his 
imagination ; and after a night spent in 
the most dreadful agonies, he determined 
to summon the duca Bertocci, and, by 
divulging a secret which materially con- 
cerned him, endeavour to conciliate the 
duca, and thereby, if possible, procure 
a mitigation of the sentence which had 
been passed. 

CHAP. 



168 THE ABBESS. 



CHAP. IV. 



■prepare to hear 



A story that shall turn thee into stone. 
Could there be hewn a monstrous gap in nature, 
A flaw made thro* the centre by some god, 
Through which the groans of ghosts might strike thy 

ears, 
They would not wound thee as this story will. 

Lee. 



Joy is in ev'ry face, without a cloud ; 
As, in the scene of op'ning Paradise, 
The whole creation danc'd at their new being, 
Pleas'd to be whatthey were, pleas'd with each other. 

Dryden. 

It is now necessary to account for the 
nnotive which induced sister Beatrice to 
make the unexpected confession which 
so providentially saved the lives of the 
conte and Maddalena Rosa. 

The reader will recollect, that, in the 

short 



THE ABBESS. 169 

short sketch which was given of her 
life, she had placed her affections on a 
youth of Naples, whose parents would 
joyfully have united their son to her, in 
consideration of her wealth, though well 
assured that his affections were pre-en- 
gaged. 

On being made acquainted with the 
true state of his heart, Beatrice deter- 
mined to revenge what she deemed the 
most flagrant injury, and, by persons 
whom she had employed for the purpose, 
gained a knowledge of the name of her 
rival, which w^as signora Isabella, the 
same that had, under the feigned name 
of Giacinta, entered the convent of Santa 
Maria. 

Beatrice's first effort was against the 
life of her rival ; but being frustrated in 
her design, she had planned those mea- 
sures, the execution of which had brought 

VOL. III. I such 



170 THE ABBESS. 

such unmerited affliction on the unfor- 
tunate Isabella. 

Signor Frederigo having at that time 
incurred the displeasure of his parents, 
by refusing Beatrice's hand, was, through 
their rigorous treatment, compelled to 
quit Florence ; and it was then that 
Beatrice's father learned from the stran- 
ger, who had been closetted with him, 
the detested machinations of his daugh- 
ter, which was the cause of his convey- 
ing her so precipitately to Florence, 
and condemning her for ever to a mo- 
nastic life. 

From this period, Beatrice had re- 
mained within the walls of Santa Maria, 
a total stranger to every circumstance 
which had transpired, respecting the ob- 
ject of her hatred, and the youth who 
had, so unfortunately for himself, in- 
spired her with a tender attachment. 
The receipt of the letters before men- 
tioned 



THE ABBESS. 171 

tioned had revived her hopes, and caused 
the extraordinary change in her conduct. 
It came from her mother; who, after 
acquainting her with her father's death, 
conveyed the pleasing intelligence, that 
Frederigo was returned to Florence, and 
under the firm belief that Isabella was 
now no more, had, to obtain his father's 
forgiveness, promised to unite himself to 
Beatrice, could her vows be annulled ; 
for which purpose interest was then 
making at Rome. By this letter she 
also learned that Giacinta, who had 
lately taken refuge in the convent of 
Santa Maria, was no other than her rival 
Isabella ; that the greatest caution was 
necessary to conceal this truth from Fre- 
derigo, and strengthen his belief of her 
death. 

Beatrice meditated at first the most 
dreadful schemes against Isabella; but 
she soon abandoned these ideas, and de- 
termined to act with subtlety, and for 
I 2 that 



172 THE ABBESS. 

that purpose, Beatrice changed her line 
of conduct ; she pretended to be highly 
interested in the fate of Giacinta, and 
by her insidious conversations, endea- 
voured to inspire her with a love of a 
monastic life. The change was too 
sudden not to alarm Isabella, who was, 
consequently, guarded in her manner, 
and slow in crediting these specious ap- 
pearances. 

About a week after the arrival of the 
first letter, Beatrice again received an 
express from Naples. She anxiously 
perused the contents, not doubting but 
they contained the intelligence of her 
being released from her monastic vow, 
and that messengers would soon arrive, 
to conduct her from Florence. What 
was therefore her disappointment at find- 
ing that all their efforts had proved 
abortive, his holiness having refused to 
free her from her vow of celibacy ! It 
was with difficulty she concealed the 

dreadful 



THE ABBESS. 173 

dreadful conflict of her mind, which 
this unlooked-for refusal occasioned. A 
thousand times, she cursed the memory 
of her deceased father, who had thus 
doomed her to a monastery ; nor was she 
sparing of her invectives against the so- 
vereign pontiff, who might have freed 
her from her irksome bondage. Some- 
times she planned an escape from Santa 
Maria; but the horrid punishment at- 
tendant on this crime, should she be dis- 
covered, deterred her from putting that 
measure into execution: she at length 
thought of an expedient. 

From the duca Bertocci's frequent 
letters to the madre Vittoria (all of 
which she had been made acquainted 
with), it was evident that he suffered 
most poignant affliction on JMaddalena 
Rosa's account. Beatrice, therefore, 
made him acquainted with the whole 
affair, on condition that he would obtain 
a promise from the inquisitor to grant 
I 3 the 



174 THE ABBESS. 

the request which she should make. She 
immediately dispatched a billet to the 
Bertocci palace, the purport of which 
was as follows : — 



" To the JDuca Bertocci 
" A stranger, well acquainted 
with the very dangerous predicament in 
which signora Maddalena Rosa is now 
involved, and who is pitying the suffer- 
ings of a fond parent, makes a voluntary 
offer of his services. The writer of these 
lines will free your daughter from the 
inquisitorial power, on one condition : — 
You must obtain a solemn promise from 
the supreme inquisitor, that I shall be 
released from a vow by which I am 
bound, and from which his power can 
exonerate me. If you succeed with the 
inquisitor, your answer must be depo- 
sited in a niche behind the fifth column 
of the centre aisle of the Grand Church 
of Santa Maria. I shall rely on your 

honour, 



THE ABBESS. 175 

honour, being sufficiently acquainted 

with the integrity of your character. 

« ********* '» 



The duca, whose mind was tortured 
with apprehension, had frequently visit- 
ed the convent, to entreat an interview 
with the madre. His attendance on the 
grand duke had been unceasing, and his 
petitions frequent to the inquisitor. 
Every effort had proved ineffectual — he 
remained a total stranger to his daugh- 
ter's fate. 

On the receipt of this letter, he was 
struck with mingled pleasure and asto- 
nishment, as he doubted not of obtain- 
ing from the inquisitor a fulfilment of 
the condition mentioned in the anony- 
mous letter. He repaired, without de- 
lay, to the grand duca, who was no 
sooner acquainted with its purport, than 
he personally accompanied the duca 
I 4 Bertocci 



176 THE ABBESS. 

Bertocci to the palace of the supreme 
inquisitor, who, after a short consulta- 
tion, gave the duca a sacred promise, 
that the writer should be freed from his 
vow. 

Having gained this necessary point, 
he wrote an answer to the letter in ques- 
tion ; and that very evening, at vespers, 
placed it in the appointed spot. ' 

J 

Beatrice, when all the convent were I 
retired to rest, descended into the \ 
church, and found the expected answer. I 
Rejoiced at the happy issue of her pro- 
ject, she the following morning divulged 
the secret to her confessor Ignazio, and, ] 
after acquainting him with the purport '. 
of her letter to the duca, she requested ] 
his advice. i 



The matter was of the greatest im- 
port, and the monk thought it necessary 
to acquaint the padre abate with the 

whole 



THE ABBESS. 177 

whole affair, who, in consequence, se- 
cretly attended the nun, and took down 
a circumstantial detail of the madre's 
proceedings. This Beatrice signed. The 
abate immediately carried it to the pa- 
lace of the inquisitor, who being then 
on duty in the prison of the Holy Office, 
he proceeded thither, and, by one of the 
officials, sent a billet, which the grand 
inquisitor received in the dungeon of 
torture, as before mentioned. It con- 
tained an earnest entreaty, on the part 
of the abate, that he would, for a few 
minutes, quit his duty, on a matter of 
the utmost importance. He obeyed the 
summons, deputing padre Nicolo to 
continue the torture on Maddalena and 
the conte. 

Having heard Beatrice's confession, 

which, if true, established the assertion 

in the mysterious letter sent to the 

duca Bertocci, he hastily descended into 

I 5 the 



178 THE ABBESS. 

the vault, and pursued the steps already 
related. 



The person who pretended to accuse 
the abbess, was one of the servants of 
the Inquisition, expressly tutored as to 
the measures he should pursue; for 
Beatrice had particularly requested that 
her name, if possible, might remain con- 
cealed. 

After having passed the sentences 
mentioned at the conclusion of the last 
chapter, by the inquisitor's order, Bea- 
trice was brought before him. He mi- 
nutely interrogated her, and from the 
answers, learned that she had been deep- 
ly involved in the madre's villainous 
schemes. He also drew from her a con- 
fession that she had been bound by an 
oath of secrecy, administered by the 
monk Ubaldo ; when he, shortly after, 
commanded her to make known the 
vow, from which she so much wished to 

be 



\ 



THE ABBESS. 179 

be absolved. Beatrice joyfully obeyed, 
and confessed her desire of being totally 
freed from her monastic engagement. 

At the conclusion of her speech, a si- 
lence of some minutes ensued, during 
which the inquisitor eyed her with a 
look of mingled anger and contempt. 
He at length addressed her as follows — 
" When the duca Bertocci applied to 
me concerning your anonymous letter, 
I gave him a solemn promise that the 
writer thereof should receive a dispen- 
sation from his vow. You, doubtless, 
penned the letter as from a man, in case 
my consent had not been obtained, you 
might have escaped detection ; by that 
artifice you have involved yourself; my 
promise not being given to one of the 
female sex, is, of course, void. You 
stipulated a release from a vow, but not 
a release from the punishment due to 
your many offences. The ardent desire 
which you evince of being absolved 
I 6 from 



180 THE ABBESS. 

from your oath of celibacy, more fully 
proves that you are still actuated by the 
same spirit of Satan and the world, and 
that the confession of your atrocious 
deeds was not dictated by real com- 
punction and true repentance. Your 
crime, therefore, in our eyes is rather 
heightened than diminished, and the 
most rigorous penance can alone ex- 
piate your faults. We shall, notwith- 
standing, free you from one detested 
oath, being that which you freely en- 
tered into with Vittoria Bracciano and 
Ubaldo; but we order you to be re- 
moved to the convent of the Ursulines 
in this city, where the strictness of their 
rule may tend to better your bad life, 
and lead you to salvation." 

Beatrice was then, by order of the 
inquisitor, led from the chamber; she 
now cursed the measure she had pur- 
sued; but execrations were vain; she 
was, that very evening, removed accord- 
ing 



THE ABBESS. 181 

ing to her sentence, and compelled to 
enter on the rigid penance which the 
rules of the convent ordained. 

The duca Bertocci received the joyful 
news of his daughter's innocence being 
ascertained, and that she would be re- 
stored to him from the prison of the 
Inquisition. He instantly repaired thi- 
ther, and was admitted into her pre- 
sence. But what words can express the 
fond father's raptures, or the exquisite 
feelings of the lovely Maddalena Rosa ! 
A thousand times he pressed her to his 
paternal bosom, and she as oft returned 
his affectionate embrace. She was over- 
come by the ecstatic bliss of the mo- 
ment 

Her tumultuous sensations in some 
degree subsiding, she was led to the car- 
riage by the duca, and soon arrived at 
the Bertocci palace, to the great joy of 

the 



182 THE ABBESS. 

the domestics, who, with tears and ex- 
clamations, welcomed her return. 

Notwithstanding the duca's efforts to 
prevent it, the confinement of his daugh- 
ter and the conte had, for some time, 
been the general topic of conversation 
at Florence, and the happy tidings of 
her liberation, and being freed from the 
least stain of guilt, was now spread 
with incredible rapidity. The court- 
yard of the duca's palace was, in a short 
time, surrounded with carriages. The 
grand duca himself visited Bertocci. 
Every person rejoiced unfeignedly in 
his happiness. Among the rest, the 
signor Viviani was announced, who now 
learned, to his inexpressible joy, that 
the conte's innocence was also proved, 
and that his friend would soon revisit 
the world. 

The faithful Gerardo also attended, 
to ascertain the truth of what rumour 

had 



THE ABBESS. 183 

had conveyed to his ear. From the 
duca's domestics he learned, that their 
young mistress was already liberated 
from the prisons of the Holy Office, and 
that he would soon behold the person of 
his master. With these glad tidings he 
flew back to the mansion of the conte, 
where the excessive joy he testified on 
the occasion, soon made the servants 
comprehend the certainty of his ap- 
proaching liberation. 

At a late hour in the evening, the 
duca received a message from the grand 
inquisitor, requesting his attendance, 
for a short period, at the prison of the 
Inquisition. He instantly obeyed the 
summons, and was shewn into his pre- 
sence. The grand inquisitor then gave 
into the duca's hand a letter, addressed 
to him. The seal had been already bro- 
ken : it was written by the monk UbaU 
do, and contained an earnest entreaty, 

on 



184 THE ABBESS. 

on his part, that the duca would repair 
to his prison, as he had a circumstance 
to relate, which greatly interested him. 

After having perused it, the inquisi- 
tor informed the duca, that in case a 
culprit solicited permission to write to 
any individual, his wish was instantly 
complied with — " Because," continued 
he, " it may chance to contain, in part, a 
confession of his guilt, or prove some 
circumstance hitherto concealed : such 
epistles are always brought for my per- 
usal." 

The duca then requested to be made 
acquainted with his decision concerning 
the letter in question. 

" I would," returned the inquisitor, 
" that you now visit the prisoner, and 
learn the secret he has to divulge. A 
secretary will be placed near at hand, to 

note 



THE ABBESS. 185 

note down every syllable he utters. Let 
me only entreat that you interrupt him 
not — neither give him the least hope of 
mercy." 

Having acquiesced in this desire, the 
duca was conducted by an official to the 
dungeon of the monk Ubaldo. On 
opening the doors, he beheld him, with 
downcast eyes and a look of despair, 
pacing the narrow limits of his damp 
abode. 

" I have obeyed your summons, pa- 
dre," said the duca, " and will lend an 
attentive ear to any circumstance which 
you may have to relate." 

" Will you likewise, after having 
heard, temper your passion with mer- 
cy ?" returned the monk, visibly agi- 
tated. 

" It is not in my nature," said the 
duca, " to be uncharitable, therefore pro- 
ceed ; 



186 THE ABBESS. 

ceed ; from me you have nothing to 
dread." 

"But if the affair greatly interests 
yourself, will you forgive me for the 
agonies I have already made you suffer, 
on your daughter's account, and exert 
yourself to obtain a mitigation of the 
dreadful death which I am doomed to 
suffer ?" 

" For myself," answered the duca, " 1 
freely pardon the past offence, of which 
you have been guilty, and pity your 
dreadful situation. I will even use my 
endeavours to soften the rigour of your 
punishment, though almost convinced 
that my attempts will prove ineffectual." 

" Oh Heavens !" exclaimed Ubaldo, 
in an agony, " how exalted now appears 
the virtuous character ! how debased is 
mine !" 

He traversed the dungeon for some 
minutes in the most terrible agitation. 
He struck his breast with violence seve- 
ral times, and his whole frame seemed 

torn 



THE ABBESS. 187 

torn with the contending emotions of his 
bosom. He suddenly stopped, and after 
fixing his eyes for some time on the 
duca's countenance, raised them up- 
wards, and cried aloud — " Merciful 
Heaven, I thank thee ! for I have it in 
my power to make some retribution." 

After a short pause, during which he 
had used his utmost endeavours to com- 
pose the perturbation of his soul, he 
addressed the duca as follows: — '* Do 
you remember the name of the mar- 
chese Ferdinando Monti ?" 

After a moment's pause, the duca an- 
swered in the affirmative. 

** Do you recollect, that he abandon- 
ed your society, being refused a post at 
court, which the grand duca bestowed 
upon yourself? — that he quitted Flo- 
rence, and has never since been heard 
of?" 

" Your mention of the affair has 

brought 



188 THE ABBESS. 

brought it fresh to my recollection/ 
said the duca. 

" The marchese," continued Ubaldo, 
*' was stung to the soul at the preference 
the grand duca had shown you. He 
possessed the most violent passions, and, 
in the bitterness of his rage, swore 
eternal hatred to you and your house. 
With this determination, he repaired to 
the vicinitjr of the mansion of Julio 
Serassi, who then had charge of your 
son ; and at the close of each evening, 
watched an opportunity of surprising 
him. Within the course of a few days, 
his wish was gratified. By his direction, 
I seized the trembling Julio, on his 
return home; for in me you behold 
the signor Felippo, brother to the mar- 
chese Monti." 

The duca Bertocci started. 

" My brother," continued Ubaldo, 
*' then drew from his bosom a dagger, 

and, 



THE ABBESS. 189 

and, by the threats of instant death, 
extorted a terrible oath from Julio, 
by which he bound himself to deliver 
your son into the marchese's hands that 
very night, and, within two days, send 
you word that your child suddenly ex- 
pired !" 

" Did he, then, murder my child ?" 
exclaimed the duca, in convulsed ac- 
cents. 

The monk continued — " At mid- 
night, your son was placed in my arms; 
my brother instantly dispatched me, 
with his prize, to a mansion which he 
had expressly purchased, in a remote 
part of the Italian States, while he con- 
tinued near Julio's mansion, to observe 
the conclusion. 

" Some weeks elapsed ere he joined 
me. On his arrival, I learned that you 
had been prevented from continuing 
the journey you had commenced, by 
meeting, on the road, Julio's express, 
which made you acquainted with the 

supposed 



190 THE ABBESS. 

supposed loss of your son, who, he in- 
formed you, had died of a fever so 
malignant, that the immediate interment 
of his remains had been deemed essential ; 
that the event had affected you so much, 
as to cause a dreadful illness, which had 
endangered your life ; and my brother 
concluded by informing me, that Julio 
Serassi had expired, which event, he 
said, precluded all idea of any future 
discovery. 

" I firmly credited this assertion, till, 
one night, awakening from a dreadful 
vision, which had greatly agitated me, as 
I lay revolving in my mind the circum- 
stances of my dream, the sound of foot- 
steps struck my ear. I listened, and 
sometimes heard indistinctly the tones 
of my brother's voice. I was astonished 
to hear him at such an unusual hour. 
Curiosity prompted me to listen. I rose, 
and approached the door which commu- 
nicated with his chamber, and through 
a crevice beheld him : he seemed in great 

agitation. 



THE ABBESS. IflJ 

agitation, and, at length, exclaimed — 
* Why are my dreams disturbed ? Why 
does the pale form of Julio haunt thus 
my nightly visions ? And must I never 
more enjoy repose ? What is murder, 
that it should thus agitate the frame, 
and unnerve the strongest mind ? Am 
I but an infant, that my limbs should 
tremble thus at unreal fantasies ?' 

" The marchese then paced his cham- 
ber for some time in silence, and, at 
length, threw himself on his couch. I 
also returned to mine, revolving in my 
mind the late scene, not doubting but 
that my brother had been accessary to 
Julio's death. During the rest of the 
night, frequent groans assailed my ears : 
they proceeded from the overcharged 
soul of the marchese. 

" I, for some days, narrowly watched 
his motions, and often conversed of 
Julio. At such times he always ap- 
peared confused, and evaded the subject. 
I at length hinted my doubts, adding, 

that 



192 THE ABBESS. 

that I had already sufficiently proved 
my brotherly affection, not to be kept a 
stranger to any affair that concerned 
him. By these arguments, I brought 
him to divulge the fact. He informed me, 
that during your illness, you had sent for 
your beloved child Rosa, from the con- 
vent of Santa Maria, and that it was 
her presence, and the resemblance she 
bore to her deceased mother, which 
soothed your sorrow, and you, at length, 
recovered ; that he had traced a messen- 
ger from Julio's mansion to Florence; 
and that, in consequence of the letter 
you received, your daughter was imme- 
diately conveyed back to the sisterhood. 
This event bred suspicion in the mind 
of the marchese, and he watched an op- 
portunity of conversing with Julio in 
private. Ere long, his desire was gra- 
tified. When my brother taxed him 
with having betrayed to you the secret, 
he solemnly denied the charge. The 
marchese then ordered him to divulge 

the 



THE ABBESS. 193 

the contents of the packet which had 
been forwarded to Florence. Julio was 
confused ; my brother threatened ; when, 
at length, falling on his knees, he con- 
fessed that the letter was written as 
from a stranger, and contained an inti- 
mation of some secret enemy having 
plotted your ruin. Julio had likewise 
cautioned you to beware of your daugh- 
ter's safety." 

" Such, indeed, were the contents of 
a mysterious letter I received," exclaim- 
ed the duca, and again relapsed into si- 
lence. 

" This avowal," continued the monk, 
" enraged the marchese. In the violence 
of his passion, he struck the supplica- 
ting Julio to the earth. — * Perhaps,' ex- 
claimed he, * it is but an evasion, and 
you have really betrayed me.' 

" This idea so forcibly influenced my 
brother's mind, that he put an end to 
his existence by strangulation, a bravo 
assisting." 

VOL. III. K The 



194 THE ABBESS. 

The duca hid his face with his hand, 
and groaned aloud. 

" My brother then informed me, that 
on the discovery of the body, the igno- 
rance of the people attributed Julio's 
death to sudden convulsions, which 
they supposed had seized him." 

Ubaldo then continued to relate the 
manner in which signor Giuseppe Ca- 
zini had been educated. He acquainted 
the duca with the oath administered to 
his son, and the plausible story that 
had influenced him to adopt such a step. 

The duca trembled, and turned pale. 

He acquainted him with their resi- 
dence at Naples, from whence the ex- 
travagance of the marchese, and his ad- 
diction to gaming, had obliged them to 
retire. 

"The 



THE ABBESS. 195 

" The natural gloominess of my bro- 
ther's mind accorded well with a monas- 
tic life. He entered the convent of the 
Dominicans in this city. Being wholly 
dependant on him, I was compelled to 
follow his example, and become a monk 
of Santa Croce. 

** My brother still harboured in his 
mind the same rooted hatred to your 
house, and determined to revenge him- 
self by the hand of your own son ! he 
would then have gloried in telling him 
the atrocity of his guilt, and pointed 
out self-murder as the only fitting means 
to terminate his detested existence. 
Thus, his vengeance would have been 
satiated, in the destruction of the male 
branch of your family. 

" Florence being your constant place 
of residence, he determined to make it 
his also. Spies were constantly watch- 
ing your motions, but no suitable op- 
portunity was found. My brother, still 
possessing large sums of money, from 
K 2 the 



196 THE ABBESS. 

the sale of his estates, made your son 
a proper allowance. He passed in Flo- 
rence for a stranger, who intended, ma- 
king this city the place of his residence. 

" My brother soon became remarkable 
for the austerity of his character, and 
was at length preferred to the office of 
an inquisitor ! — I pursued the same steps, 
in the hope of one day attaining the si- 
tuation of abbot of Santa Croce. To 
forward this plan, I readily entered into 
the madre's scheme respecting the conte, 
as her interest would have greatly for- 
warded my design. I did not fail to en- 
trust my brother (now known by the name 
of Girolamo) with every circumstance. 

" When I communicated to him the 
discovery which had taken place, re- 
specting the conte and signora Madda- 
lena, a fresh idea of revenge entered his 
mind. He bade me urge the madre to 
pursue the most rigorous measures, and, 
some days after, repaired himself to the 
convent, to strengthen her in her reso- 
lution. 



THE ABBESS. 197 

lution. Thus he thought to bring your 
daughter to the stake, and utterly exter- 
minate the race of Bertocci. 

" Having the officials of the Inquisi- 
tion under his command, your motions 
were watched, and he became acquainted 
with your journey to the Castello di 
Valdarno. Your son was dispatched to 
perpetrate the deed of horror " 

" Heavens !" exclaimed the duca — 
*• and was it my son ?" 

He was unable to proceed — his emo- 
tions stopped all utterance. 

"At his return," continued Ubaldo, 
" he informed my brother, that the sud- 
den appearance of the conte Marcello 
had prevented the execution of the 
deed. No farther attempt was made, 
till the night when you endeavoured to 
gain admission to your daughter. In 
traversing an avenue, I beheld you. I 
repaired to the chamber where I knew 
K 3 my 



198 THE ABBESS. 

my brother then was. I found him 
anxiously waiting the arrival of your 
son ; for it was by Girolamo's order that 
you were admitted into the prison, and 
that your conductor left you in that 
dreary passage. Finding Giuseppe still 
delayed coming, and fearful that such 
an opportunity might never again occur, 
he snatched himself a dagger, which lay 
unsheathed, and, by a secret passage, 
soon gained the place where you stood. 
" During his absence, your son en- 
tered the chamber. I related what had 
occurred — he drew from his bosom a 
poniard, which he had carried since the 
night when he had taken the fatal oath of 
vengeance, with the intent, as I sup- 
posed, of perpetrating the deed, should 
my brother fail in his attempt. In a 
few minutes, Girolamo returned — fury 
and disappointment marked his features. 
It was some time ere I learned the fail- 
ure of his design, but he felt reanimated 
on being made acquainted with Giu- 

seppe^s 



THE ABBESS. MS 

seppe's proceeding. A considerable time 
elapsed ere his return, when he inform- 
ed us, that he had vainly sought you 
throughout the prison. 

* My orders, then, were disobeyed,' 
cried Girolamo. ' Curse on the slug- 
gish officials, that suffered him to pass 
the prison-gates P 

" From that period the affairs of the 
Inquisition, respecting your daughter 
and the conte, wholly interested him. 
He inwardly gloried in the agonies 
which you must experience on Madda- 
lena Rosa's account, and determined 
that you should first witness her death, 
which he thought inevitable, and after- 
wards receive the destined blow from 
Giuseppe's hand." 

Here Ubaldo concluded. The duca 
had Hstened to his recital with mingled 
sensations of dread, horror, and amaze- 
ment; and was for some time unable 
to make the least reply. He soon quit- 
K 4 ted 



200 THE ABBESS. 

ted the cell, having first assured the 
monk that every effort should be set on 
foot to obtain a mitigation of his punish- 
ment. 

The duca repaired to the grand in- 
quisitor, who was already in possession 
of Ubaldo's relation. Giuseppe's re- 
sidence was known to many of the offi- 
cials, one of whom was immediately 
dispatched to desire his attendance at 
the Inquisition. Great was the duca's 
agitation during the intervening period. 
His name was at length announced — 
the door was thrown open, and Giuseppe 
entered ! He started on beholding the 
duca, who, unable to resist the powerful 
workings of his bosom, flew towards 
him with open arms, and clasping him 
to his breast, sobbed aloud — " My son ! 
my son !" 



CHAP. 



THE ABBESS. 201 



CHAP. V. 



Let order die. 



And let this world no longer be a stage, 
To feed contention in a ling'ring act; 
But let one spirit of the first-born Cain 
Reign in all bosoms, that each heart being set 
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end, 
And darkness be the burier of the dead. 

Shakspeare. 

Ubaldo's confession was exhibited the 
following morning, by the grand inqui- 
sitor to the other lords of the Holy 
Office, when Girolamo and the monk 
were both conducted before the tribu- 
nal. 

The confession made to the duca Ber- 
tocci, on the preceding night, was forth- 
with read aloud by the secretary, at the 
conclusion of which, Ubaldo was order- 
K 5 ed 



202 THE ABBESS. 

ed to ratify the same on oatli. Falling 
upon his knees, he pressed the sacred 
missal to his lips, evincing the most un- 
feigned contrition for his atrocious guilt, 
at the same time throwing himself on 
the mercy of his awful judges. 

Girolamo, who had listened unmoved 
to the circumstantial detail of his dread- 
ful crimes, was next called upon to 
avow or deny the fact ; but he maintain- 
ed a sullen silence. His arms continued 
wrapped within the long folds of his 
black garment, and his horrific eyes were 
rivetted, with an expression of dreadful 
malignity, on the person of his still 
pjcostrate brother. Thrice was the ex- 
hortation repeated; but Girolamo, like 
a statue, heard, unmoved, the address of 
the grand inquisitor, who was on the 
point of summoning the familiars to 
conduct him to the rack, when disdain- 
fully motioning his left hand, and with 
a haughty inclination of the head, he 

spoke 



THE ABBESS. 203 

spoke to the following effect : — " Think 
not so meanly of my nobility, as to 
imagine that I shall basely supplicate 
your mercy. The confession of this de- 
spicable villain, with whose ignoble soul 
I disclaim all kindred, is indeed true in 
its utmost extent. Revenge hath been 
the source of all my actions; it is that 
noble passion which, for many years, 
has rendered life supportable, and which 
now inspires me with fortitude to en- 
dure your tortures, and disdain that 
death I am inevitably doomed to suffer. 
Think not that the cause of religion in- 
stigated me to become one of your 
order. No, I deemed it the most con- 
venient mask to veil the secret purposes 
of my soul. 'Tis true, I have been frus- 
trated in my grand attempt ; yet, think 
not that death-dealing vengeance sleeps 
within my breast ; no, the glorious pas- 
sion now bursts forth, and thus fulfils its 
last grand great purpose." 

K 6 As 



204 THE ABBESS. 

As he pronounced these words, he 
drew a poniard from his bosom, and 
furiously rushed towards his brother; 
when the inquisitors precipitately rose 
from their seats, to stay his dire intent. 

" Die, miscreant !" loudly vociferated 
Girolamo. 

At that instant the dagger's hilt twice 
drank Ubaldo's blood, who, groaning, 
called for mercy, and expired. 

Already was the weapon raised to 
pierce his own detested bosom ; but the 
inquisitors seized, and after a violent 
struggle, wrenched it from his nerved 
grasp. The fratricide Girolamo gnashed 
his teeth, and violently clenched his 
hands, yet dripping with the purple gore ; 
but suddenly turning his hateful regard 
on the ghastly features of the lifeless 
Ubaldo, the welcome sight reanimated 
his dark soul, and his features were suf- 
fused 



THE ABBESS. 205 

fused with a horrid smile ; like the sun's 
faint gleam, piercing a tempest-fraught 
cloud; or the keen lightning's blaze, 
momentarily irradiating the pitchy at- 
mosphere, but to render the murky 
night still more dreadful. 

" Now, lead me to the stake !" cried 
Girolamo; " and you, my lords, you 
who have witnessed my determined spi- 
rit, be also present at my torments; then 
learn, that the marchese Monti can defy 
your utmost malice, and expire without 
a groan." 

After being sentenced to experience 
every torture which the tribunal could 
inflict, the guilty wretch was conducted 
back from the chamber of office to his 
lonely dungeon. 

When abandoned to his meditations, 
the condemned Girolamo felt no sting of 
conscience; the same obduracy conti- 
nued 



206 THE ABBESS. 

nued to mark his conduct. He passed 
his time in execrations at the failure of 
his attempt on the duca Bertocci and 
his son, and in sometimes yielding to 
the diabolical pleasure he experienced, 
in having put a period to his wretched 
brother's existence. 

The dreary hour of midnight at 
length arrived, when he was dragged 
to the dungeon of torture. With the 
most hardened contumacy, he yielded 
his body to every excruciating pang that 
could be inflicted ; not one groan found 
passage from his labouring bosom ; his 
excessive pride enabled him to endure, 
in succession, the infliction of each pu- 
nition. Girolamo was then supported 
to his gloomy abode, to sustain, unpitied 
and unheard, the gnawing anguish of 
his lacerated limbs. 

For three successive nights, sleep vi* 
sited not the wretched culprit. At 

length 



THE ABBESS. 207 

length his pangs, in some degree, sub- 
siding, nature became exhausted, and, 
on the fourth night, he closed his 
deadened eyes. Suddenly, the length- 
ened toll of a bell aroused him from his 
unquiet slumber. Girolamo knew the 
knoll; it was to him death's boding 
sound — the heavy call of San Domenico, 
which had so often announced to the 
innocent victims of that tribunal their 
approaching end. 

Such was, indeed, the midnight sig- 
nal for the Act of Faith to be perform- 
ed the following day. The dungeon 
door was, shortly after, thrown open, 
and some of those familiars who had so 
repeatedly obeyed Girolamo's nod, now 
vociferated dreadful curses on his head, 
at the same time presenting him with 
the painted garment called Samaretta, 
with which he was commanded to co- 
ver himself The officials then quitted 
the cell. 

Girolamo 



208 THE ABBESS. 

Girolamo seized the horrid vestment ; 
it was of black cloth, whereon were 
represented flames and painted figures 
of demons, in the midst of which was 
portrayed, to the life, his own dark 
countenance. A direful oath escaped 
Girolamo's lips ; he, frowning, gnashed 
his teeth, and, enraged, cast the mantle 
from him. 

Again the familiars appeared : they 
uttered threats, and vented imprecations 
on his tardiness: resistance was of no 
avail ; Girolamo sullenly threw off the 
inquisitorial garb, which he had still 
continued to wear, and covered himself 
with the infamous habit. He was then 
led forth to the chamber of incurables, 
where he continued, until the prison 
clock proclaimed the fourth hour of 
morning. Bread and figs were then 
sparingly tendered him ; but Girolamo, 
without deigning to speak, waved his 
hand in token of refusal. 

By 



THE ABBESS. 209 

By sunrise, the great bell of the Do- 
minicans was heard : it was the signal, 
and thousands prepared to attend the 
miserable spectacle. 

On a scaffold, opposite the grand gate 
of the Inquisition, were seated one of the 
lords of that tribunal and a secretary, 
who read over, in an audible voice, the 
names of all such criminals who were to 
attend the procession. 

Of those wearing the sambenito, the 
number was very considerable ; but one 
culprit only was to share a similar fate 
with Girolamo. It was an unfortunate 
female, who, seduced in early life from 
the path of virtue by some base villain's 
insidious arts, had abandoned herself to 
the commission of every crime, and had 
lastly been accused of heresy before the 
holy table of office. 

San Domenico being the first founder 

of 



210 THE ABBESS. 

of this tribunal, the monks of that order 
preceded the fraternity of every other 
convent in this procession. Before them 
was carried the banner of the Inquisi- 
tion ; it was of the finest crimson velvet, 
fringed with gold, and spotted with 
stones of immense value ; in the middle 
was most Vv onderfuliy wrought in needle- 
work, the figure of the saint, in the habit 
of a Dominican ; his right hand bore 
an olive branch, and in his left he bran- 
dished a naked sword ; he appeared to 
be ascending on a cloud ; at his feet a 
dog lay couchant, from whose mouth 
issued a brand, whose flaming point was 
directed towards a sphere, emblematical 
of the world ; over his head was a scroll, 
whereon the words — " Misericordia et 
Justitia^ were embroidered ; the reverse 
of this banner displayed the appearance 
of a bleeding cross. 

Next issued from the gaol those pri- 
soners deemed penitents, their heads un- 
covered. 



THE ABBESS. 211 

covered, and bare-footed, bearing each a 
burning taper in his hand. They were 
severally accompanied by two respect- 
able persons of the city, who acted as 
their sureties, and walked on either side 
of them in the procession. 

After these was borne a ponderous 
crucifix of silver, the martyred figure of 
the Saviour of mankind being of virgin 
gold. The front of this cross faced those 
who preceded it, to denote that Hea- 
ven's mercy would be extended to all 
true penitentiaries ; its back was turned 
on Girolamo and the female, who fol- 
lowed after, each accompanied by a Je- 
suit and a friar, preaching, in the same 
breath, repentance and eternal torments. 

In succession were carried on staves 
the sculptured effigies of two persons^ 
supposed heretics, who had expired un- 
der the infliction of the torture, when 
in the prison of the Inquisition. Then 

came 



212 THE ABBESS. 

came two sledges, drawn by black horses, 
bearing the uncovered coffins that con- 
tained their putrid corses, which were 
to be cast amidst the flames, and burned 
to ashes. 

With folded arms, in loose black ha- 
bits that totally obscured their counte- 
nances, followed the familiars, officials, 
and torturers, to the number of fifty. 
After these came the vicar, the notary, 
and a secretary, bearing the laws of the 
Holy Tribunal, on a cushion wrought 
with crosses of silver. 

Twenty youths, habited in scarlet and 
white robes, next appeared, waving cen- 
sers, that perfumed the air with aroma- 
tic odours. Amidst these, affixed to 
the point of a spiral wand of ebony, was 
the representation of the bloody stained 
napkin, or Santa Veronica. 

Under a superb canopy, supported by 

four 



THE ABBESS. 213 

four distinguished persons of the city, 
sumptuously habited (who deemed this 
employment a peculiar honour conferred 
on them), walked the great judge of the 
Inquisition. His habit was most splen- 
did, and the train of his robe was up- 
held by two noblemen of Florence ; the 
other lords of the Holy Office then fol- 
lowed. Behind them came the reverend 
fathers of saint Ambrose, the monks of 
saint Laurence, and the mendicant friars 
of saint Francis. 

The numerous magistrates of the city, 
robed, came in succession, according to 
their several dignities ; then the most 
opulent of the citizens, each uncovered, 
and holding in his hand a crucifix ; last- 
ly, the foot-guard and a troop of horse 
terminated this show of splendour and 
misery. 

Having traversed all the noble places 
and streets of Florence, the procession 

at 



214 THE ABBESS. 

at length entered the magnificent church 
of the Dominicans. Its structure was 
Gothic, and in the form of a cross. 
Benches were fitted up the whole length 
of the great aisle, on which the prisoners 
and their sureties seated themselves. 

The Dominicans and the monks of 
the other orders that attended, took 
their station around the high altar, 
which was covered with black cloth, 
and simply adorned with six candle- 
sticks of silver, burning lofty tapers of 
green wax. The supreme inquisitor, 
with his brethren, mounted a sumptu- 
ous throne, purposely erected, to the 
left of the altar, while the grand duke 
and his nobles ascended a canopied gal- 
lery, on the opposite side. 

The various citizens took their re- 
spective stations, and the immense con- 
course of people, kneeling, filled every 
avenue of the building. 

The 



THE ABBESS. 215 

The silver cross being placed, with 
great solemnity, on the holy table, a 
Dominican monk delivered a discourse, 
wherein he fully explained the laws and 
institution of this sacred tribunal, and 
greatly enlarged on the theme of mercy, 
which, he alleged, was its most striking 
characteristic. 

This harangue being concluded, the 
notary of the Inquisition read aloud the 
names and several crimes of those pri- 
soners, then present, who had been cited 
before the Table of Office, but who, by 
contrition, sought mercy at the hands of 
their judges; each criminal extinguish- 
ing his taper, and falling on his knees, 
during the time his name and heresy 
were thus proclaimed. 

The grand inquisitor, then, in an 
audible voice, freed these unhappy vic- 
tims from the sentence of excommuni- 
cation, wherewith they had been loaded. 

After 



216 THE ABBESS. 

After which, they were permitted to 
approach the steps of the altar, where a 
monk attended, who held forth a missal, 
which they severally kissed. 

This ceremony ended, the name of 
the female was at length proclaimed. 
Girolamo, as aw^akened from a trance, 
fixed his eyes upon the object who was 
to share a similar fate with himself 
Violent emotions wrung his breast, and, 
shuddering, he turned his eyes from the 
sight. 

Her crimes being enumerated, she was 
by the grand inquisitor proclaimed in- 
curable, and, after receiving from him 
the blow of excommunication, was for- 
mally delivered over to the secular arm, 
which immediately passed on her the 
sentence of death. 

In an audible voice, the secretary 
then called forth the name of Girolamo, 

otherwise 



THE ABBESS. 21? 

otherwise marchese Monti. At that in- 
stant, a piercing shriek was heard ; it 
proceeded from the condemned female. 
Every one imagined that this exclama- 
tion originated in the dread she felt at 
her approaching end ; but far different 
was the reality from this supposition. 
She remembered not the altered features 
of the monk ; neither did she know him 
by the name of Girolamo; but when 
the name of Monti struck her ear, a 
thousand horrid recollections rushed 
upon her brain. She could not withstand 
the powerful workings of her mind, but 
fainted in the arms of the guards sur- 
rounding her. 

The secretary continued to proclaim 
the monk's crimes, and the woxdfratri- 
cide was murmured from every quarter. 

Being in holy orders, it was requisite 
that Girolamo should be degraded of 
his honours, and stripped of his sacred 

VOL. III. L vest- 



218 THE ABBESS. 

vestments. The religious garb was then 
presented to him, and he was conducted 
towards the altar, that he might deliver 
it up to the grand inquisitor. He obey- 
ed in silence, and with a sullen air com- 
plied with the various forms practised 
on this occasion. After which he sur- 
rendered himself to the secular judge, 
whose place it was to conduct him to the 
stake. 

The immense concourse of persons 
were already in motion to quit the 
church, and hastened to the spot ap- 
pointed for execution, when the female, 
having recovered from her lifeless situ- 
ation, begged to address the lords inqui- 
sitors for a few minutes. 

Some time elapsed ere this extraordi- 
nary request was complied with. She 
at length received permission, when, 
falling on her knees, she related in few 
words her unhappy tale. 

Honoria 



THE ABBESS. 219 

Honoria Celza, the real name of the 
culprit, was a native of Venice. She 
was born of a reputable family, and re- 
ceived an education far superior to her 
station in life. Those persons who were 
acquainted with Honoria, admired her 
excellent understanding, and aptness at 
study ; she was universally caressed, and 
the idol of her fond parents. The re- 
peated encomiums lavished on her abi- 
lities, ere she had attained her seventeenth 
year, kindled in her susceptible bosom 
the first sparks of vanity. She soon as- 
pired to the company of those too much 
her superiors ; nor was Honoria ever ab- 
sent from places of public resort. It 
was at one of these entertainments that 
her personal charms attracted the atten- 
tion of a youthful libertine. For some 
time his arts proved unsuccessful ; at 
length he offered her honourable terms. 
She was too much prejudiced in his fa- 
vour, and relying implicitly on his oaths 
and protestations, the villain, in an un- 
L 2 guard- 



220 THE ABBESS. 

guarded moment, triumphed in her ruin. 
This wretch was the marchese Monti ! 
Honoria was one of the numerous vic- 
tims sacrificed to his licentious desires. 

Too soon she learned her error ; his 
passion once gratified, he totally aban- 
doned her, still adding to his crime, by- 
making the circumstance known to all 
his associates. The fact in a short time 
became public, which soon put a period 
to her father's existence. Honoria then 
fled her native city, and sought an asy- 
lum in Florence; there she was compel- 
led to associate with the most abject 
wretches, to procure a scanty subsis- 
tence. 

Her mind became gradually hardened 
to scenes of iniquity, and she swore 
eternal hatred to that sex which had first 
led her from the path of virtue. 

During several years she totally aban- 
doned herself to the commission of the 
most flagrant crimes, when suddenly 
the recollection of her mother took pos- 
session 



THE ABBESS. 221 

session of her mind. Honoria repaired 
to Venice ; but on applying for admis- 
sion, she was thrust from the door. 
Violent in her emotions, she cursed that 
being who had borne her, and meditated 
the direst scheme of revenge ; this she 
compassed by effecting the death of her 
parent. This atrocious deed was accom- 
plished with so much art, that no sus- 
picion was attached to Honoria, who 
became thereby possessed of her mo- 
ther's property. 

With this acquisition of fortune she 
returned to Florence, where the recol- 
lection of her guilt embittered each mo- 
ment of her wretched existence. To 
blunt the goading sting of conscience, 
Honoria hardened her mind still more 
in iniquity ; for despairing of Heaven's 
mercy, she inwardly cherished the most 
daring opinions, in opposition to the Ca- 
tholic belief. Her freedom of speech 
soon subjected her to the inquisitorial 
power, where, notwithstanding her pro- 
L 3 testations, 



222 THE ABBESS. 

testations, she was adjudged an arch- 
heretic, and one totally abandoned of 
Heaven 

During her interrogatories, Girolamo 
had been always present, and was him- 
self the most forward in condemning 
her. The wretched Honoria little ima- 
gined, as trembling she heard his threats, 
that he was the sole cause of all her 
crimes. But not so Girolamo ; he knew 
the culprit well, yet felt no touch of re- 
morse for his crime — no pity for the ob- 
ject, whose guilt had originated with 
himself 

When the secretary repeated the 
well - remembered name of Monti, it 
awakened in Honoria's breast the most 
agonizing sensations, and caused, for a 
short period, the total suspension of 
every faculty. 

In her confession she protested that 
Girolamo was the author of her crimes ; 
she praised that Divinity, whose won- 
der-working power would thus punish 

his 



THE ABBESS. 223 

his guilt ; and concluded by glorifying 
Heaven's supreme decree, that so justly 
doomed her to the death she merited. 

A dreadful murmur echoed through 
the church, as the culprits were hurried 
forth to execution. Many pitied Ho- 
noria's fate; but universal execrations 
were loaded on the hateful Girolamo. 
When at the stake, his murderous arm 
was first severed from his body, and cast 
into that fire already consuming the pe- 
nitent Honoria. The chain was then 
affixed to Girolamo's body, who was 
sentenced to be burned by a slow fire; 
yet he shrunk not from the scorching 
flame that gradually consumed his flesh, 
and ended at length his detested exist- 
ence. 

Thousands witnessed the appalling 
spectacle, but not one pitying sigh was 
heard. He expired amidst the shouts 
and curses of the surrounding multitude. 

L 4 CHAP. 



224 THE ABBESS. 



CHAP. VI. 



-Oh, ray soul's joy 



If, after erery tempest, come such calms. 

May the winds blow, till they have waken'd death ? 

And let the labVing bark c!imb hills of seas, 

Olympus high ; and duck again as low. 

As hell's from heav'n ! H I were now to die, 

Twere now to be most happy ; for, I fear. 

My soul hath her content so absolute. 

That not another comfort, like to this. 

Succeeds in unknown fate. Shakspeare. 

The powers of imagination fail — lan- 
guage is too feeble — words cannot paint 
the interesting meeting that took place 
between the duca Bertocci and his 
son. The most powerful emotions fre- 
quently interrupted their conversation, 
and it was difficult to determine, whe- 
ther paternal affection or filial love most 
predominated. They, at length, repair- 
ed 



THE ABBESS. 225 

ed to the Bertocci palace, where a simi- 
lar scene again took place ; for, in em- 
bracing Giuseppe, Maddalena took to 
her arms that unknown stranger, who 
had so generously ministered comfort to 
herself, and whose soothing language 
had endowed the conte Marcello with 
fortitude and resignation, when prison- 
ers in the solitary dungeons of the Holy 
Office. 

How frequently did their reciprocal 
transports burst forth ! — how often did 
Giuseppe press his lovely sister to his 
palpitating bosom, while the enraptured 
duca shed tears of joy upon his virtuous 
children, mentally glorifying that Su- 
preme Deity, by whose wonderful de- 
cree he was thus restored to unforeseen 
happiness ! 

Giuseppe, by his father's desire, cir- 
cumstantially related the various inci- 
dents of his life. The recital awakened 
L. 5 in 



226 THE ABBESS. 

in the duca's bosom a thousand varied 
sensations. How did he tremble with 
painful apprehension at the dangerous 
counsels which had been instilled into 
his son's breast !— what fond rapture did 
he experience, on finding that he pos- 
sessed such innate virtue, as to resist 
their baleful influence ! 

In the course of his relation, the duca 
became acquainted with Giuseppe's pas- 
sion for Antonia, and her prepossession 
in his favour. Fearful, in the extreme, 
lest any incident should occur to damp 
the happiness of his child, he dispatched 
a messenger, on the instant, conveying 
to Antonia's father a recital of the late 
extraordinary events that had occurred, 
and the consequent change in Giuseppe's 
situation. 

The conte Marcello Porta, having 
fully complied with the several articles 
stipulated in his sentence, was finally 

released 



THE ABBESS. 227 

released from the prison of the Holy 
Office. 



On his return to the Porta Palace, he 
was joyfully received by his numerous 
domestics, who testified their love in 
clamorous acclamations. But who can 
imagine the ecstacy of joy that thrilled 
the breast of the good and faithful Ge- 
rardo ! he fell prostrate before the 
conte: he kissed his feet, clasped his 
knees, and plenteously bedewed his out- 
stretched hand with tears, that issued 
from an o'ercharged heart. He strove 
to pour forth blessings, but his faltering 
tongue denied all utterance, and he 
sunk fainting to the earth, o'ercome by 
this excess of pleasure. 

After having with difficulty forced 
himself from his attendants, the conte 
flew to his chamber, where he was in- 
stantly joined by his friend Viviani. 
Their arms were open ; they flew to 
L 6 each 



228 THE ABBESS. 

each other's embrace, while either turn- 
ed his face, to hide the tear which in- 
vohmtarily burst forth. After a pause 
of considerable length, they regained 
the faculty of speech : their joy was 
reciprocal, and Viviani a thousand times 
congratulated his friend on his happy 
deliverance from the inquisitorial power. 

Having seated themselves, the conte, 
at the earnest desire of his friend, gave 
an exact account of every thing that 
had occurred to him in the Inquisition. 

His relation created a thousand dread- 
ful apprehensions in the breast of Vi- 
viani, who, at the conclusion of the 
narrative, again poured forth the glad 
effusions of his soul, in terms that 
strongly indicated the sincerity of his 
friendship. 

Having fully satisfied Viviani's curi- 
osity, the conte, in his turn, begged to 

be 



THE ABBESS. 229 

be made acquainted with every occur- 
rence that had taken place, since his un- 
happy arrest. 

Viviani then informed him of Ge- 
rardo's visit to his hotel ; from him he 
had first heard of the seizure of his 
person, by the officers of the Inquisi- 
tion. He then explained his fruitless 
attempts to gain admittance to the 
prison of the Holy Office : he related 
his interview with the duca Bertocci, 
and the meeting which took place with 
the madre Vittoria. — " At length," con- 
tinued Viviani, " I was compelled to 
abandon all idea of rendering you the 
smallest assistance. I neglected the re- 
peated invitations of my friends; for 
the interest which I took in your fate, 
banished from my bosom every sensa. 
tion of pleasure. 

*' Some days elapsed ere I summon- 
ed sufficient resolution to quit my hotel. 

My 



SIStJ- THE ABBESS. 

My first visit was to the habitation of 
donna Laura — yes, conte, she was the 
only object I deemed worthy of my 
confidence — her susceptible heart I 
thought formed for sympathy ; nor was 
I deceived in my favourable opinion of 
that lovely creature. She heard the 
circumstance of your unmerited fate 
with pity, and alleviated the violence of 
my sorrow by the tenderest solicitude. 
Her gentle manners soon gained entire 
possession of my affections: her en- 
chanting company was the only society 
I courted. She did not long remain a 
stranger to my passion : the confession, 
conte, proceeded from my own lips ; it 
was favourably received ; for the blush- 
ing Laura, with a noble frankness, avow- 
ed a reciprocal prepossession in my fa- 
vour; and our union has been merely 
delayed till the result of your fate should 
be known. Ah, conte! innocence has 
prevailed : you are once more free : your 
Rosa is proved innocent, and restored to 

her 



THE ABBESS. 231 

her fond parent's longing embrace ; and 
Viviani, your friend, is happy beyond 
conception. 

" Yet, a-propos, conte, do you re- 
member the story of the avvocato and 
the beautiful Teresa, his immaculate 
daughter ?" 

" Yes, Viviani ; for the recollection 
of your woe-begone countenance, and 
the long dressing-gown that enveloped 
your bruised limbs, will never escape 
my memory." 

" Well, conte, you remember that I 
swore vengeance on the jilts; and it is 
some few days since I found a glo- 
rious opportunity of putting my threat 
into execution." 

" Pray gratify me by a relation of the 
circumstances." 

" Returning to my hotel, from the 
mansion of my Laura, two females pass- 
ed me in the strada, and I instantly re- 
cognised the arch jades, with whom I 
had the unfortunate rencontre on the 

banks 



232 THE ABBESS. 

banks of the Arno. The disagreeable 
sequel of that adventure recurred to my 
mind, and I determined on a retort. 

" I observed, that they had not no- 
ticed me, or, at any rate, did not retain 
the slightest recollection of my person. 
I followed their steps, at some distance, 
till they arrived at the suburbs of the 
city, at which time each surrounding 
object was partly obscured by the dusk 
of evening. The situation being un- 
frequented, I was advancing towards 
them, unconscious what plan I should 
adopt, when suddenly one of the sisters 
coughed aloud three distinct times. It 
struck me, on the instant, that this 
must be some signal, and I quickly 
retired within the portico of an adjoin- 
ing mansion. 

" The ladies made a halt, and carefully 
looking round, once more repeated the 
summons. It was answered this time; 
and presently after, a male figure ap- 
peared, into whose hands one of the fe- 
males 



THE ABB£SS. 233 

males slipped a billet, and then both 
struck into an adjoining strada. 

" I quitted my hiding-place, and 
making towards the stranger, who had 
not retired many paces from the spot, I 
found from his appearance that he was 
a servant, or some person hired for this 
occasion. Without hesitation, I seized 
him by the collar, and partly unsheath- 
ing my sword, protested that I would 
show^ no mercy, unless he immediately 
delivered me the letter with which he 
had just been intrusted. I also tendered 
him a liberal reward, if he complied 
without delay. The knave did not re- 
quire a moment's hesitation : he instantly 
produced the billet, and, with the most 
obsequious bow, received the proffered 
gold. 

" I hastily broke the seal ; but evening 
was so far advanced, 1 could not peruse 
the contents. I engaged the fellow to 
accompany me to the first house of 
public resort, when I found that the 

letter 



234 THE ABBESS. 

letter contained an appointment to meet 
two favoured signors at dusk, the fol- 
lowing evening. The writer had parti- 
cularly described the dress and colour of 
the veil she purposed wearing, as also 
that of her sister. 

" My plan was immediately formed. 
I attempted, but being unable to affix 
the seal to the original letter, I copied it 
verbatim, in a hand resembling, as much 
as possible, that before me. I then told 
the fellow that I had been guilty of a 
gross mistake, as the contents of the 
note, which I had taken from him, did 
not in the least relate to the business I 
had conjectured. As a proof of what I 
had alleged, I bade him peruse both 
the writings. He was perfectly satis- 
fied, and really credited my assertion. 
I then sealed the billet, which I bade 
him safely deliver to his employers. 

" Well pleased, he quitted me, be- 
stowing a thousand benedictions on my 

head. 



THE ABBESS. 235 

head, for the reward he had so easily 
obtained. 

** The very same evening, I dispatched 
a letter to the avvocato Feti, appointing 
him to attend two females of distinction, 
at the hour and place mentioned by the 
sisters. I described the habiliments, and 
alleged, as the cause for such secrecy, 
that they were on the point of allying 
themselves clandestinely, and that im- 
mense property having been bequeathed 
them, under various restrictions, his 
opinion, as a man of sound judgment, 
known integrity, and strict honour, was 
required on the occasion. 

"It was some time ere I could call to 
mind the residence of the sisters, which 
I had heard mentioned by donna Teresa, 
the avvocato's daughter, while attesting 
her own purity, and calumniating their 
characters. 

" I at length recollected the name 
of the strada in which they lived. I 
repaired thither without delay, and soon 

traced 



236 THE ABBESS. 

traced the house, by the exact descrip- 
tion I gave of the two young females, 
whose father is a well-known scrivener, 
of the name of Gonda. To him I like- 
wise forwarded a note, alleging an affair 
of secrecy, as I had before done to the 
avvocato, and also requiring his attend- 
ance at the place of rendezvous. 

" I had now executed my plan, and 
returned to my hotel, overjoyed at the 
success of my enterprise. 

" During the night, an idea struck 
me, that I could even heighten the ri- 
diculous scene which was to take place, 
by procuring the attendance of another 
female. 

" I rose early the next morning, ha- 
bited myself most sumptuously, and 
repaired to the chapel of Santa Cata- 
rina, close to the Strada Nova. Soon 
was my utmost wish gratified. Yes, 
conte — I beheld the lovely one-eyed 
Teresa Feti. 

*• Concealing my countenance as 

much 



THE ABBESS. 237 

much as possible, I approached her with 
seeming diffidence. My apparel in- 
stantly attracted her regard : she forgot 
her beads, and I, without much diffi- 
culty, engaged her in conversation. 

" I most passionately assured her, 
that I was only son of one of the most 
powerful noblemen of Italy ; that the 
fame of her piety and mental accom- 
plishments had brought me to Florence, 
unknown to my parents; for that I 
could not support existence, without 
privately declaring the ardency of my 
passion. I then assured her, that my 
intentions were most honourable, and 
that could she but deign to swerve, for 
once, from the rigid path of rectitude, 
I would introduce her to the company 
of two females of noble birth, who 
would vouch for the purity of my sen- 
timents. In short, conte, she yielded 
to my entreaty, without alleging one 
argument in opposition to my wish. 

** I then named that evening for our 

meeting, 



THE ABBESS. 

meeting, at the same hour and place as 
appointed by the females. I also begged 
that she would come veiled, and, de- 
scribing the dress of one of the sisters, 
entreated that her dress might resemble 
it, as much as possible. 

" You may form some conjecture, 
conte, as to the state of my feelings 
during the day. Every hour was multi- 
plied into an age: I really imagined (so 
much was my mind gratified with the 
idea of the approaching scene), that even- 
ing would never come. 

" The convent-bells sounding for ves- 
pers, at length proclaimed the near ap- 
proach of the appointed hour. 

" Covering my face as much as possible 
with my hat, and throwing my long 
mantle over my shoulders, I repaired 
with hasty step to the scene of action. 

" Having cautiously concealed myself 
behind the large trunk of an adjoining 
tree, I anxiously awaited the arrival of 
this curious group. 

"Ere 



THE ABBESS. 239 

" Ere long I heard the sound of foot- 
steps, and presently beheld two cava- 
lieros, whose manners soon convinced 
me that they were the youths who at- 
tended to meet the daughters of the scri- 
vener Gonda. Immediately after, ha- 
bited precisely as I had desired, came 
the all-lovely and at^tractive Teresa Feti, 
the veil being plaited over her face in so 
many folds, that it was totally impossible 
to discern a trait of her countenance. 

" One of the young signors, at sight 
of the avvocato's daughter, deceived by 
her attire, flew, on the wings of light- 
ning, towards Teresa, and was in an in- 
stant prostrate at her feet. With the 
most visible marks of astonishment, she 
received this unexpected rencontre : she 
made a thousand awkward repulsive mo- 
tions, but to no effect; for the youth, 
conceiving this but an assumed bashful- 
ness, pressed his suit with redoubled ar- 
dour ; and Teresa, not daring to unveil 

herself. 



240 THE ABBESS. 

herself, was compelled to bear with for- 
titude this mortifying circumstance. 

" In a few seconds appeared signor 
Gonda, who advanced with cautious 
step and prying regard. No sooner had 
his eye caught the figure of Teresa, than 
he instantly paused ; then taking my 
letter from his pocket, perused it with 
seeming attention. Again he advanced; 
and as he approached the place where I 
stood, some unconnected words struck 
my ear, which indicated his surprise at 
beholding one female only. 

" Scarce had he passed the tree by 
which I was concealed, when both his 
daughters hastily advanced. That cava- 
liero who had awaited at some distance 
the coming of his damsel, moved for- 
ward with precipitation, while his friend, 
who was still engaged with signora 
Feti, on beholding them, started back 
with surprise. 

** Teresa, thus freed from his impor- 
tunities, flew towards the scrivener's 

daughters. 



THE ABBESS. 241 

daughters, believing them to be the 
distinguished females whom I had that 
morning described, screaming aloud for 
protection. 

" Signor Gonda, alarmed at the noise, 
turned his head; but, far from knowing 
his daughters thus veiled, believed them 
to be the two ladies mentioned in his 
appointment, and, with a quick step, 
made towards them. 

" At this critical juncture came the 
avvocato himself. At sight of the scri- 
vener, to whom he was by no means 
partial, he made an abrupt halt, while 
his features underwent a variety of 
changes. 

' Blessed Santa Catarina, my father 
here !' exclaimed his daughter Teresa. 

* Merciful Heaven, our father!' reite- 
rated Gonda's hopeful children. 

" In an instant all was clamour and 
confusion. The two cavalieros, relying 
on their fleetness, immediately took to 
their heels. Teresa, affecting to swoon, 

VOL. III. M fell, 



242 THE ABBESS. 

fell, groaning, on the turf, while signor^ 
Gonda began plentifully belabouring his 
panic-struck daughters. 

" The furious avvocato, raving, ap- 
proached his prostrate Teresa, whose 
nose he instantly tweaked with his ut- 
most force. This endeavour to revive 
her proved of instantaneous effect, for 
she sprang from the earth, sending forth 
the most hideous yell. Her splenetic 
father, whose passion was now at its 
height, rushed on the innocent scrivener, 
conceiving he had been principally con- 
cerned in the cheat, as the dress of his 
daughters so exactly answered the des- 
cription given of the females in my let- 
ter to him. 

" The most dreadful contest immedi- 
ately took place, and terrible blows were 
plentifully showered on either side. An 
unlucky stroke, at length, felled the 
avvocato, from whose nose issued a 
purple stream. Poor Gonda's wig had 
been demolished at the commencement 

of 



THE ABBESS. 243 

of the affray, so that his bald pate and 
tattered apparel made the most ludicrous 
appearance, as, champion-like, he stood 
over the fallen foe. 

" Teresa Feti, maddened at the dis- 
appointment of her fond hopes, enraged 
at finding she was thus duped, and 
firmly believing that the objects of her 
inveterate hate had planned this scheme, 
the situation of her father too, all con- 
spired to rouse her into action. With 
the fury of a tigress, she flew at Gonda's 
daughters, whose limbs had already suf- 
fered from their father's harsh treatment. 

" Here a new scene commenced. The 
veils and other outward habiliments, not 
to forget the faces of these Amazons, 
soon bore convincing marks of the sharp- 
ness of their talons. The combat con- 
tinued for some time with equal fury, 
when the approach of strangers at length 
put an end to the contest. 

" I then quitted my station unob- 
served, and almost expiring with excess 
M 2 of 



244 THE ABBESS. 

of laughter, just at the moment when 
an explanation was taking place, and my 
letters were produced on either side." 

The conte was much entertained by 
the relation, and, smiling, congratulated 
Viviani on having so fully revenged 
himself on the authors of his former dis- 
appointment and disgrace. 

In the evening the conte dispatched 
a billet to the duca Bertocci, entreating 
he might be permitted, the following 
day, to offer his respects in person. 
The duca's answer was favourable to his 
wishes. 

How tediously lagged the intervening 
hours ! what contrary emotions pervaded 
Marcello's breast ! what inexpressible 
sensations agitated the susceptible bosom 
of the gentle Rosa ! A pleasing circum- 
stance, however, occurred, which, for a 

time. 



THE ABBESS. 245 

time, suspended this perturbation of 
her spirits. 

That evening her loved friend Isabella 
was announced. They flew into each 
other's arms, and, for some time, tears 
alone expressed the poignancy of their 
sensations. 

Maddalena then learned, with the ut- 
most satisfaction, that the contessa Men- 
zia had soon become acquainted with 
her lover's return to Naples, and that, 
through her entreaties, added to the me- 
lancholy state of Frederigo's mind, his 
parents had relinquished all idea of 
uniting him to Beatrice, should she even 
obtain a dispensation from her vow of 
celibacy, and had finally given their con- 
sent to his union with Isabella. 

Maddalena was soon compelled to se- 
parate from her friend, who, instantly 
after, departed from Florence, to join at 
M 3 Naples 



246 THE ABBESS. 

Naples her beloved Frederigo. They 
parted, however, but for a short period, 
Maddalena having prevailed on Isabella 
to make Florence the future place of her 
residence. 

The following morning, the conte 
Marcello, accompanied by his friend 
Viviani, with a palpitating heart, pro- 
ceeded to the Bertocci palace, where 
he was received by the duca with every 
mark of affection, while pleasure ani- 
mated Maddalena's tender bosom, on 
again beholding, after so many painful 
vicissitudes, the man she loved. 

The conte, on hearing Giuseppe's 
eventful history, congratulated the duca 
with unfeigned joy, and warmly pressed 
to his heart the virtuous brother of his 
adored Maddalena. 

Viviani's generous soul witnessed this 
scene with rapturous delight ; and he 

inwardly 



THE ABBESS. 247 

inwardly rejoiced in the supreme felicity 
of his loved friend. 



The duca's anxiety on his son's ac- 
count was in a few days relieved, the 
messenger returning with the congratu- 
lations of Antonia's parents, and their 
consent to an alliance with his family. 

This packet also contained an account 
of the decease of Antonia's brother, to- 
gether with a confession he had made 
previous to his death, of having attempted 
the assassination of Giuseppe. 

This haughty youth, finding his sis- 
ter's affections irrevocably fixed on a 
being he deemed so unworthy of her- 
self and family, had traced Giuseppe to 
Florence, where he hired bravoes; but 
mistaking the person of Marcello Porta 
for the object of his vengeance, had 
attacked him, as before related, when on 
his way to the cloisters of Santa Maria. 

In 



248 THE ABBESS. 

In this rencontre, he received a wound | 
from the conte, which had long endan- \ 
gered his life ; and on being conveyed 
from the scene of action by his domestic, : 
who likewise concealed the body of the 
murdered assassin, the diamond cross 
found by Marcello Porta had escaped j 
his bosom i 

Shortly after his recovery , the unhappy i 
youth fell a sacrifice to his own rashness, 
having been slain in a duel, which he I 
fought on a false punctilio of honour. 

During the residence of Antonia*s ' 
brother at Florence, Ubaldo had been 
his confessor. That rash youth, finding 
the monk apt to his purpose, made him 
acquainted with the circumstance of his ] 
sister's love, only concealing the name \ 
of Giuseppe. 

By Ubaldo's artful insinuations, the j 
youth became more exasperated, and 

then 



THE ABBESS. 249 

then communicated to him the plan he 
had formed of assassinating Cazini. 
The monk applauded his resolution — 
adduced the most subtle arguments, to 
prove that he would be guilty of no 
crime, in thus ridding himself of a man 
who attempted to dishonour his family, 
and then promised him absolution for 
the diabolical act. The time was fixed, 
Ubaldo being an accessary in procuring 
the bravoes. 

When the conte explained to the 
monk in the cloisters of Santa Maria, 
the base attack made upon his life, 
Ubaldo was thunderstruck : he had little 
imagined that the object of the youth's 
vengeance was the noble Marcello Porta. 
It was this circumstance which prompted 
him to leave the conte in the antique 
gallery, while he repaired to the madre 
Vittoria, whom he made acquainted with 
every circumstance relating to Antonia's 
brother. 

The 



250 THE ABBESS. 

The madre was astonished at the 
monk's relation, yet conjectured, that 
there must have been some mistake, as 
an alliance with the conte could not have 
been deemed dishonourable. 

She, however, determined to ascer- 
tain whether it was really Marcello 
Porta who felt a passion for Antonia, 
ere she would admit him to her pre- 
sence ; and it was by her desire he was 
left in the gallery, and not conducted 
thence till the following morning. 

Sister Beatrice, from whom nothing 
was concealed, soon became acquainted 
with this affair, which she afterwards re- 
lated in her confession to the padre 
abate of Santa Croce. By this means 
the grand inquisitor gained his know- 
ledge of the diamond cross, of which 
he had made inquiry during the conte*s 
last examination. 

Some 



THE ABBESS. 251 

Some days after Isabella's departure 
from Florence, Maddalena Rosa re- 
ceived a packet, conveying the intelli- 
gence of her friend's happy union with 
Frederigo, and concluded in the follow- 
ing words : — " You, my loved friend, have 
endured the strange vicissitudes of the 
fickle goddess : your heroic virtue has 
uniformly supported you under the pres- 
sure of affliction. Isabella, too, has 
been the child of calamity ; but the 
dark clouds, that lowered over her, are 
now dispersed: the genial sun of hap- 
piness sheds around its cheering rays, 
and I enjoy a bliss unchequered : the 
same smile irradiates my Rosa's coun- 
tenance : we were the handmaids of 
dewy-cheeked sorrow : we are become 
joy's dimpled sisters, and soon, like me, 
you will experience a more than mortal 
felicity, in the possession of the deserv- 
ing object of your love." 

THE END. 

Printed by J. Darling, Leadenliali-Street, Lundun. 



NEW PUBLICATIONS. 

£ S. d. 

Felician Alphery, or the Raleigh Family, by the au- 
thor of Herwald de Wake, &amp;c. 3 vols 16 6 

Experience, a Tale for all Ages, by the author of Re- 
alities, Correction, &amp;c. 4 vols 1 2 

The Spy Unmasked, a Sequel to the Spy, by Mr. Cooper, 

"l vols 10 

Adventures, or Scenes m Ireland in the Days of Queen 

Elizabeth, by O'Driscol, 3 vols 1 1, 

Gilbert Earle, 3d edition 5 

Blount's MSS., or the Papers of a Man of the World, 

by the same Author, !^d edition* 2 vols 10 6 

Story of Isabel, by the Author of Favourite of Nature, 

2d edition, 3 vols 1 10 

The Guards ! 8vo. 3 vols 1 8 6 

Bandit Chief, by the Author of Eustace Fitz-Richard, 

&amp;c. 2d edition, 4 vols 120 

Fashionable Mysteries, or the Rival Duchesses, by Fran- 
cis Lathom, 3 vols 18 

Gomez Arias, or the Moors, 3 vols 1 7 

Ruddiman's Tales and Sketches, 8vo 10 6 

Devil's Elixir! from the German of Professor Hoff- 
mann, 2 vols 12 

Reginald Trevor, or the Welch Loyalists, a Tale of the 

Seventeenth Century, 3 vols 18 

Tales, Mournful, Mirthful, and Marvellous, by Mrs. 

Wilmot Wells, Bvo. 3 vols 1 1 (» 

Eleanor Ogilvie, the Maid of the Tweed, a Romantic 

Legend, 3 vols 16 6 

Fate of Graysdale, a Legend, 2 vols 14 

Mysterious Freebooter, by Francis Lathom, 3d edition, 

4 vols 1 2 

Lord Morcar of Hereward, a Romance of the Times of 

William the Conqueror, 4 vols ^ 1 2 

The Blandfords, by Henrietta Rouvierre Mosse, 4 vols. 14 

The Indian Chief, or Tokeah and the White Rose, a 

Tale of the Indians and the Whites, 3 vols 16 6 

Freebooter's Bride, or the Black Pirate of the Mediter- 
ranean, 5 vols 1 7 6 

14] 

